CSEC®
English
Caribbean Examinations Council
SYLLABUS 
SPECIMEN PAPER 
MARK SCHEME
SUBJECT REPORTS
EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish
Macmillan Education 
4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW 
A division of Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Companies and representatives throughout the world 
www.macmillan-caribbean.com 
ISBN 978-0-230-48179-4 AER
© Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC®
) 2015
www.cxc.org
www.cxc-store.com 
The author has asserted their right to be identified as the author of this work in accordance with the 
Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988. 
First published 2014
This revised version published 2015 
Permission to copy 
The material in this book is copyright. However, the publisher grants permission for copies to be 
made without fee. Individuals may make copies for their own use or for use by classes of which they 
are in charge; institutions may make copies for use within and by the staff and students of that 
institution. For copying in any other circumstances, prior permission in writing must be obtained 
from Macmillan Publishers Limited. Under no circumstances may the material in this book be used, 
in part or in its entirety, for commercial gain. It must not be sold in any format. 
Designed by Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Cover design by Macmillan Publishers Limited and Red Giraffe 
CSEC® English A and English B Free Resources 
LIST OF CONTENTS 
CSEC® English A & B Syllabus Extract 4
CSEC® English A & B Syllabus 5
CSEC® English A Specimen Papers 
Multiple Choice 66
Paper 02 81
CSEC® English A Mark Schemes 
Multiple Choice 90
Paper 02 91
CSEC® English A Subject Reports: 
2004 Subject Report (January) 106
2004 Subject Report (June) 112
2005 Subject Report (June) 120
2006 Subject Report (June) 133
2007 Subject Report (June) 148
2008 Subject Report (June) 162
2009 Subject Report (June) 179
2010 Subject Report (January) 191
2010 Subject Report (June) 200
2011 Subject Report (January) 206
2011 Subject Report (June) 214
2012 Subject Report (January) 219
2012 Subject Report (June) 225
2013 Subject Report (January) 230
2013 Subject Report (June) 236
2013 Profile Cut-Offs 249
2013 Table of Specifications 251
2014 Subject Report (January) 253
2014 Subject Report (June) 259
2015 Subject Report (January) 267
CSEC® English B Specimen Papers: 
Paper 01 274
Paper 02 281
CSEC ® English B Mark Schemes: 
Paper 01 287
Paper 02 293
CSEC ® English B Subject Reports: 
2004 Subject Report (June) 330
2005 Subject Report (June) 339
2006 Subject Report (June) 347
2007 Subject Report (June) 355
2008 Subject Report (June) 365
2009 Subject Report (June) 375
2010 Subject Report (June) 385
2011 Subject Report (January) 394
2011 Subject Report (June) 404
2012 Subject Report (January) 414
2012 Subject Report (June) 425
2013 Subject Report (January) 437
2013 Subject Report (June) 450
2014 Subject Report (January) 462
2014 Subject Report (June) 476
2015 Subject Report (January) 488
English A & B
Students who do the English course will explore receptively and expressively three 
major literary modes – Drama, Poetry, and Prose Fiction – in order to become aware 
of the many functions and purposes of language. In doing so, they will discover that 
the four facets of language arts – namely listening, speaking, reading and writing – are 
closely linked together and are interdependent.
Syllabus objectives are organised under understanding and expression in order to guide 
curriculum development, to give meaning to a teaching programme and to define an 
assessment scheme that reinforces an English syllabus which has been conceived as 
an integrated approach to language teaching and which enables students to appreciate 
the holistic nature of language learning.
The English syllabus is organised for examination as English A and English B. The 
former emphasises the development of oral and written language skills among students 
through a variety of strategies. The latter provides opportunities for students to explore 
and respond critically to specific literary texts as they observe and appreciate the 
author’s craft.
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate
CSEC
ENGLISH
SYLLABUS
Effective for examinations from May/June 2012
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
Published by the Caribbean Examinations Council
© 2010, Caribbean Examinations Council 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means electronic, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior 
permission of the author or publisher.
Correspondence related to the syllabus should be addressed to:
The Pro-Registrar
Caribbean Examinations Council
Caenwood Centre
37 Arnold Road, Kingston 5, Jamaica, W.I.
Telephone: (876) 630-5200
Facsimile Number: (876) 967-4972
E-mail address: cxcwzo@cxc.org
Website: www.cxc.org
Copyright © 2009, by Caribbean Examinations Council
The Garrison, St Michael BB14038, Barbados
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
 
Content 
RATIONALE.................................................................................................................................... 1 
AIMS.................................................................................................................................................. 1 
SKILLS AND ABILITIES TO BE ASSESSED ............................................................................. 2 
RECOMMENDED TIME ALLOCATION .................................................................................. 4 
ENGLISH A AND B - NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES ......................................... 5 
THE ENGLISH A EXAMINATION.............................................................................................. 18 
- OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH A 
THE ENGLISH B EXAMINATION.............................................................................................. 22 
- OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH B
PRESCRIBED TEXTS FOR ENGLISH B..................................................................................... 29 
SUGGESTED READING LIST FOR ENGLISH ........................................................................ 32 
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 57
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
AMENDMENTS ARE INDICATED BY ITALICS
REVISED 1997, 2003 AND 2009 
Please check the website, www.cxc.org for updates on CXC’s syllabuses
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
English Syllabus 
♦ RATIONALE
The ability of students to understand fully what they listen to, read and view as well as to express 
themselves clearly in speech and in writing are critical factors in managing their personal and social well￾being. The study of language and literature provides opportunity for students to develop competence and 
confidence in speaking and writing for personal and public purposes in everyday activities. It also seeks to 
develop students' ability to read and enjoy literary texts, to explore social and moral issues, and to evaluate 
the way language grows, develops and is used. The study of language and literature also recognises the dynamics of 
viewing and valuing as students respond critically to the wealth of electronic media which help to shape our perceptions 
at conscious and unconscious levels. 
Students explore receptively and expressively three major literary genres, Drama, Poetry, and Prose Fiction, 
in order to become aware of the many functions and purposes of language. In doing so, they discover that 
the five facets of the language arts, namely, listening, speaking, reading, writing and viewing, are closely 
linked together and are interdependent. 
Syllabus objectives are organised under understanding and expression in order to guide curriculum 
development, to give meaning to the teaching programme and to define an assessment scheme that
reinforces an English syllabus which has been conceived as an integrated approach to language teaching. 
This enables students to appreciate the holistic nature of language learning.
The English syllabus is organised for examination as English A and English B. The former emphasises the 
development of students’ oral and written language skills among students through a variety of strategies. 
The latter provides opportunities for students to explore and respond critically to specific literary texts as 
they observe and appreciate the author’s craft.
♦ AIMS
The syllabus aims to:
1. develop the ability to use the spoken and written language, Caribbean Standard English (CSE), with precision, 
clarity and grammatical correctness;
2. develop the ability to use, understand and respond to spoken and written Caribbean Standard English; 
3. develop the ability to use language effectively for communicating in a variety of contexts: social, academic and 
professional; 
4. develop the ability to give effective articulation to experience (real or imagined);
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 1 
5. promote in students a willingness and ability to inform themselves about, and to contribute reasoned opinions on 
social issues;
6. promote a lasting appreciation of the diversity of purposes for which language varieties are used;
7. promote an understanding and appreciation of the place and value of the varieties of English and of the dialects 
and creoles of the Caribbean and other regions in different social and cultural contexts; 
8. develop a critical awareness of the language devices used to persuade;
9. develop an ability to respond to literature for pleasure, to recognise and respond to the writer’s craft, and to make 
sensitive appraisals of value judgments and other concepts expressed in literature;
10. develop knowledge of the various sources of information and a desire to use these for the student’s own 
enlightenment; while recognising the importance of acknowledging the contribution of such sources to their own 
ideas; 
11. develop the capacity to assess the reliability of sources including those available on the Internet. 
♦ SKILLS AND ABILITIES TO BE ASSESSED
The aims stated above can be attained by developing the related skills in the student. These skills are 
categorised under the two broad headings: Understanding, the decoding and interpreting of messages through 
the analysis of the language structures and devices used in any given context, and Expression, the conveying of 
meaning through the selection of language structures and devices appropriate to each specific context. 
Performance will be reported under the profile dimensions Understanding and Expression. 
1. Understanding
The ability to:
(a) understand meaning conveyed (both in listening and in reading) through word choice and 
grammar, and (in reading) through punctuation and paragraphing;
(b) obtain information accurately, as demonstrated in the ability to:
(i) recognise facts stated explicitly;
(ii) extract specific information from what is read or heard;
(iii) extract implied information;
(iv) identify stated or implied time sequence;
(v) draw valid conclusions and inferences from information presented;
(vi) recognise cause and effect relationships;
(vii) identify main and subordinate ideas and trace their development;
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 2 
(viii) recognise the difference between denotative and connotative language;
(ix) treat with passages whose main purpose is informative (expository) as opposed to 
literary or persuasive;
(x) interpret and respond to tables and pictorial communication, such as diagrams, 
conventional signs and symbols;
(c) grasp insights from reading literature and demonstrating the ability to:
(i) deduce reasons and motives for particular spoken and written communication (other 
than those with an overt persuasive intent);
(ii) appreciate the appropriateness of different uses of tone, mood, register, code and 
style in talks and speeches, in non-literary forms including scientific or technical 
writing, and in literary forms (prose, verse and drama), in relation to the author’s 
intention;
(iii) detect connotations in the use of words and in the presentation of ideas and 
distinguish between connotative and denotative meaning;
(iv) detect and assess the apt use of devices such as pun, innuendo, exaggeration, irony 
and symbolism;
(v) recognise and respond to the appropriateness of the means, including form and 
structure, used by a speaker, director or author to achieve the intended effect of a 
talk or speech, letter, article or essay, poem, novel, story or play;
(vi) visualise the situation, attitudes, mood and setting of a play and appreciate how they 
influence the actions and interaction of actors in the performance of that play;
(vii) recognise implicit themes;
(viii) respond to West Indian and other literature in English (novels, short stories, poems 
and plays): recognise elements of the writer’s craft; respond to writers’ evocation of feelings, 
moods, atmosphere; making critical appraisal of values and concepts expressed in 
literature, and relate these to everyday living;
(d) recognise and evaluate opinion expressed in various forms as demonstrated in the ability to:
(i) distinguish factual statements from unsupported opinion statements;
(ii) detect connotations in the use of words and the presentation of ideas;
(iii) evaluate the effectiveness of language devices used to persuade;
(iv) recognise the range of techniques of persuasion employed in social intercourse and 
in the mass media, and assess the persuasive effects.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 3 
2. Expression
The ability to:
(a) use appropriate diction, grammatical forms (both in speaking and in writing) and suitable 
punctuation and paragraphing to convey meaning clearly and with facility;
(b) communicate factual information clearly, concisely and adequately in giving oral and written 
instructions, reports, summaries, and expositions;
(c) give aesthetic satisfaction to others in personal, creative and imaginative language by:
(i) organising and sequencing ideas to communicate emotional and imaginative 
interpretations of experience;
(ii) using language (tone, mood, register, code and style) appropriate to particular 
situations and contexts;
(d) communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or 
dissuades effectively. This will involve the ability to: 
(i) present reasoned evaluative comments on proposals and situations of various kinds 
in language that is clear and appropriate to the occasion;
(ii) demonstrate the ability to employ, wherever necessary, a range of persuasive 
techniques for emotional impact;
(iii) present a logical argument using justifiable techniques related to sound oral and 
written debate.
♦ RECOMMENDED TIME ALLOCATION
It is recommended that in order to satisfy the requirements of the English A and English B examinations, a 
minimum of six sessions should be allocated to English A and four to English B per week. However, it is 
recognised that students and teachers operate in a wide variety of situations and under an equally wide variety 
of conditions. It is important that individual institutions develop an allocation of time taking the following 
into consideration:
(i) language competence levels of students at point of entry into the examination class;
(ii) availability of human and other resources;
(iii) learning styles of students;
(iv) school culture;
(v) normal timetable concerns; and 
(vi) balance among skills needed in English A and English B.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 4 
CONTENT
The choice of material to be used in the classroom will be guided by both the language needs of daily living 
and the need of the students to develop the skills and insights necessary if they are to derive satisfaction from 
novels, stories, poems and plays. The approach in this syllabus calls for emphasis on the exposure of students 
to literature, not to the learning of facts about literary theory.
A reading list is included in the syllabus to offer help to schools in choosing class texts to develop the ability to 
enjoy literature. It is a list of suggested reading, not prescribed reading. It offers a guide to the range of 
material that is suitable for particular groups of students. Schools are encouraged to create situations which 
lead to wide reading by students.
There will, of course, be differences from territory to territory and even from school to school, so the 
recommendations must not be taken as binding in any way. It is hoped that students will be encouraged to 
read widely within the range of titles suggested both by the list and by the teacher’s own additions to it, and 
that class sessions and written assignments will be geared to stimulate and reward this extra reading of, and 
interest in literature. 
The reading list includes a number of reference texts on the teaching of drama. The approach to drama 
implicit in the syllabus places the emphasis on the use of activities such as miming, improvisations, the reading 
and acting of plays in the classroom that would help in the development of self awareness and understanding 
of others. The texts included in the suggested reading list will provide guidance in implementing this aspect 
of the drama programme, particularly in the first three years of secondary schooling.
♦ ENGLISH A AND B - NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES 
(FORMS 1 - 5)
Communicative competence is a critical issue in any classroom and is the focus of the aims outlined earlier in 
this syllabus. Students will be expected to demonstrate good control of the mechanisms of language, write 
good, clear prose, and to communicate easily, precisely and fluently. It is a sound instructional principle to 
practice the skills required to achieve these features within situations that simulate the social contexts as nearly 
as possible. The importance of the oral aspects of English A should be emphasised, even though these are 
currently not assessed by the Council. Schools are, therefore, encouraged to engage the oral aspects of English 
A. 
It is recommended that teachers in all subjects ensure that the English language competence of their students 
is satisfactory. With this in mind, it is suggested that teachers of English should provide guidance to teachers 
of other subjects with respect to the quality of English expected to be displayed, and that 5% of the marks for 
any assignment should be allocated to the quality of the language used in presenting the assignment, oral or 
written.
Suggested teaching activities are intended to guide teachers into a full understanding of the objectives of the 
syllabus, while offering ideas for both teaching and assessment activities. This list of activities is not 
prescribed, nor is it exhaustive.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 5 
ENGLISH A and B – NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
Understanding (a) – Grammar and Mechanics
Students should be able to:
1. explain meaning 
conveyed (both in 
listening and in 
reading) through 
word choice and 
grammar, and (in 
reading) through 
punctuation and 
paragraphing.
Word choice: 
formal, informal, non￾standard, Creole, literal, 
figurative use, fixed phrases, 
synonyms, antonyms, 
homonyms.
Wide reading (class 
library); shared newspaper, 
assessing alternative 
Internet sites, listening to 
effective speeches, oral 
skills; use of dictionary 
and thesaurus including e￾dictionary and e-thesaurus; 
word puzzles, word-a-day, 
vocabulary notebooks, word￾attack skills.
Cloze tests
Sentence completion
Synonyms
Antonyms
Definitions
Grammar: 
a. syntax – the ways in 
which words are 
ordered and connected 
to form phrases or 
sentences with 
particular meaning.
 
Grammar check in word 
processing. 
Explicit language 
comparison and 
substitution and 
restructuring drills (as in 
second-language teaching); 
critical listening and 
reading exercises; 
identifying sentence 
patterns, analysing fact, 
evaluating arguments and 
opinions.
Study and discussion of video 
extracts relating to (a) 
standard English spoken by 
Caribbean persons (b) by non 
Caribbean persons or (c) by 
Caribbean persons with non￾Caribbean influences, for 
example, (note word choice, 
check for agreement in 
grammar, common and 
different aspects of language 
use.
 
Listening and reading 
comprehension exercises, with 
answers dependent on the 
understanding of particular 
forms, structures, patterns.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 6 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
b. morphology – the ways 
in which the form of 
words and fixed phrases, 
and the changes made to 
them affect meaning.
Exercises to differentiate 
marking of number, 
possession, verb tense, 
adjective degree, pronoun 
reference, and word￾building. Use of word￾processing tools for editing.
As overleaf. 
 
Punctuation: 
recognition of punctuation 
marks and their effect on 
meaning – capital letter, 
question mark, exclamation 
mark, full stop, semi-colon, 
comma, colon, apostrophe, 
quotation marks, brackets, 
dash, hyphen, ellipsis.
Critical discussion and 
correction of punctuation 
used in selected and 
prepared material;
dictation; reading aloud to 
identify contribution of 
punctuation to meaning. 
Unpunctuated passages 
used to focus on links 
between punctuation and 
interpretation.
Dictation
Reading aloud to show 
appreciation of punctuation; 
Explaining the effects of 
punctuation marks in context; 
Paragraphing Justifying choice of topic 
sentences in paragraphs 
read or heard; making an 
outline from a given 
(magazine) article; 
evaluating colleague’s 
paragraphs, creation of 
dialogue and role play and 
other controlled oral 
activity, impromptu 
speech.
Using written material:
- identifying topic 
sentences; 
- explaining the effect of 
paragraphing in passages 
with and without 
dialogue; 
- similar exercises using 
oral materials or video;
Expression (a) – Grammar and Mechanics
Students should be able to:
1. use appropriate 
diction and 
grammatical forms 
(both in speaking 
and in writing) and 
suitable 
punctuation and 
paragraphing to 
convey meaning 
clearly and with 
facility.
Diction: 
appropriate diction 
matches word choice and
style to the purpose,
situation, audience and 
content of the written or 
spoken discourse; accurate 
use of words, fixed phrases, 
synonyms and antonyms is 
expected.
Use of dictionary and 
thesaurus including audio 
samples on e-dictionaries; 
creating word puzzles; 
Scrabble; word-a-day; 
vocabulary notebooks; 
rewriting items for 
different purpose and 
situation and audience; 
oral and written sentence 
completion and cloze 
exercises. 
Role play: (1) various 
professions 
(2) use of hierarchy -
Sentence completion and cloze 
tests
Word substitution
Structured writing or speaking 
task to test appropriate diction 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 7 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
(student/principal), worker 
/superior
(3) other relationships: 
civilian/law officer; sales 
clerk/customer.
Grammar: 
adjustment of grammatical form 
for flexibility as appropriate 
to audience and context, 
sentence functions
(statement, question) and
types (simple, compound), 
for accuracy: number, 
identification of subject, 
concord, pronoun reference, 
possessives, sequence of 
tenses.
Use of grammar check on 
Microsoft Word.
Practice in appropriately 
structuring and altering 
statements, questions; 
synthesis; building 
complex and compound, 
sentences. 
Oral, then written 
language comparison and 
restructuring drills; proof￾reading exercises to 
identify and correct errors 
of number, concord, 
reported speech, journal 
writing, oral interviews, 
impromptu speeches. 
Extended writing task to test 
use of suitable variety of 
sentences 
Synthesis 
Extended writing task to test 
accuracy in the statement of 
number and concord. Error 
recognition; error correction; 
Changing direct to reported 
speech; 
Punctuation: 
appropriate use of capital 
letter, questions mark, 
exclamation mark, full stop, 
semi-colon, comma, colon, 
apostrophe, quotation marks,
brackets, dash, hyphen, 
ellipsis.
Reading aloud; giving, 
taking dictation; proof￾reading exercises.
Extended writing task to test 
appropriate use of necessary 
punctuation marks
Dictation
Correcting an unpunctuated 
passage;
Paragraphing: 
logical division of 
continuous writing into 
coherent paragraphs; 
conventions of paragraphing 
shown in writing dialogue.
 
Outlining a composition 
by grouping brainstormed 
(or jumbled) ideas; oral 
and written expanding of 
topic sentences into 
paragraphs; adding 
properly sequenced 
paragraphs to create a 
longer work. Semantic 
mapping.
Listening to speech to 
recognise how the flow of 
ideas helps/hinders audience 
understanding and suggests 
organisation.
Listening to speech to note 
Extended writing task (essay, 
short story) to test effective 
paragraphing; 
Dividing passage into 
paragraphs; 
Correcting faulty paragraphing;
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 8 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
how natural chunking, 
pausing, voice change, suggest 
punctuation.
Understanding (b) – Informative Discourse
Students should be able to extract information accurately. This involves the ability to:
1. recognise facts 
stated explicitly;
As the first level of 
questioning, this requires a 
basic understanding of 
information presented 
directly in language to be 
taken literally.
Use of various subject 
textbooks, manuals, 
newspaper reports, 
notices, recipes, tables, 
charts, signs, maps, 
diagrams, audio and 
videotape.
Use of Internet articles on 
same/similar topics – 
analysis of views, and 
separation of facts from 
opinion.
Multiple choice, short-answer, 
oral questions re explicit 
information (read, heard or 
shown in a diagram). Who, 
what, where, when, why, how 
questions.
Following directions
2. extract specific 
information from 
what is read or 
heard;
Selection of relevant 
information, making use of 
titles, introductions, topic 
sentences, illustrations.
Note-taking; making 
outlines, summaries, 
paraphrases; given titles; 
formulating questions to 
elicit data.
Written and oral summaries, 
reports. Reporting data as 
diagrams, charts. Picking the 
outline from an article.
3. extract implied 
information;
Reading ‘between the lines’ 
(a critical skill) is used in 
interpreting information 
presented indirectly.
Making inferences from 
suitable passages, poems; 
deducing meaning of 
cartoons, and trends in 
charts, advertisement, 
other oral media and 
presentation.
Multiple choice, short-answer, 
or oral questions re implied 
information (read, heard, or 
seen in graphic).
 Listening/watching video: 
(i) make predictions based on 
speech, music, atmosphere, 
body language and on other 
behaviours (ii) study/ deduce 
character based on dress, 
behaviours, speech (iii) 
discussion on what ‘setting’ 
contributes to meaning: 
hearing and understanding, 
for example, influence of 
indoor/outdoor; social 
location, for example,
church/market.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 9 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
4. identify stated or 
implied time 
sequence;
Important for following 
instructions and for making 
good sense of information 
received in confused order, 
as in flashbacks.
Re-ordering jumbled 
directions, picture 
sequences, planning 
activities; taking minutes 
of meetings; chronological 
listing of events in 
account; identifying cue￾words (first, second, next, 
then; dates).
Assessing the clarity of 
instructions on the labels of 
commercial products.
Following instructions, 
directions. Arranging (events 
recounted, pictured) in 
sequence. Numbering logical 
sequence.
5. draw valid 
conclusions and 
inferences from 
information 
presented;
Identifying sound and 
unsound deductions in 
particular examples, and 
generalisations from samples.
Recognising faulty 
reasoning and inadequate 
or biased samples in 
prepared explanations, 
reports.
Differentiating sound from 
unsound conclusions in given 
deductions and generalisations.
6. recognise cause￾effect relationships;
To be distinguished from 
coincidence to avoid false 
conclusions.
Identifying cause and 
effect (and coincidence) in 
stories, reports of events 
and experiments.
Identifying (or predicting) 
effect of given cause (and vice 
versa) in a passage (narrative or 
expository).
7. identify main and 
subordinate ideas 
and trace their 
development;
Structure seen through 
sequence of topics of 
individual paragraphs. 
Themes of longer works.
Note-taking; book-reports; 
analysing structure of 
paragraphs, short stories, 
novels, essays, oral 
narratives. Comparing 
novel with movie version.
Making summaries, outlines of 
items read or heard. 
Identifying themes in essay, 
story.
8. recognise the 
difference between 
denotative and 
connotative 
language;
Denotative (dictionary 
meaning) for literal, 
objective understanding; 
connotative (suggesting 
feelings) for subjective, 
emotional response.
Dictionary work;
comparison of similar 
information presented in 
contrasting styles; study of 
effect of word choice on 
slant, bias in oral and 
written narratives.
Differentiating between 
denotative and connotative 
language in prepared extracts. 
Giving unbiased equivalents of 
loaded terms.
9. identify passages in 
which the main 
purpose is 
informative 
(expository) rather 
than literary or 
persuasive;
Expository: to inform, 
explain; Literary: to 
entertain, stir feeling; 
Persuasive: to convince, 
direct.
Analysis of author’s 
purpose, and intended
audience; focus on 
elements of style which 
support informative 
purpose.
Choose expository extracts 
from a mixed selection; 
identify author’s precise 
purpose and intended 
audience.
 Watch/listen for denotative 
and connotative use of key 
words discussed before start of 
viewing/listening.
 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 10
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
10. interpret and 
respond to tables 
and pictorial 
communication, 
such as diagrams, 
conventional signs 
and symbols.
Verbal information is often 
supplemented.
Analysis of tables, charts, 
signs, maps, diagrams; 
converting the 
information to verbal 
form; making inferences 
from the data. 
Recognise and discuss 
trends; make predictions.
Identify signs on maps. 
Extract data; make inferences 
from tables, charts; summarise 
data in writing.
Continuous writing exercises, 
developing what is given in the 
visual. 
Expression (b) – Informative Discourse
Students should be able to:
1. communicate 
factual information 
clearly, concisely 
and adequately, in 
giving oral 
instructions, 
reports, summaries, 
and expositions in 
appropriate 
language.
Information discourse takes
various forms: essays,
summaries, reports, 
instructions
Clarity of instructions
depends upon precise 
language and careful 
sequencing of information.
Writing instructions, 
recipes; designing 
application forms; 
explaining how to play a 
game.
Exercises in giving/following 
oral instructions.
Writing directions and 
explaining how to operate an 
appliance.
Reports are expected to be
objective, accurate, 
comprehensive and helpfully 
organised.
Giving evidence to an 
investigator; reporting 
accident; oral or written 
reports of surveys, news 
reports, minutes.
Reporting a missing person; 
Reporting on a club project; 
A media report on a sports 
event; 
Press releases.
Summaries require economy 
of language, the careful
selection of relevant main 
ideas, and the preservation 
of the intention of the 
original.
Writing telegrams, 
classified advertisements, 
resumes, minutes of a 
meeting; summarising a 
radio news item; 
condensing a passage, 
isolating the views of one 
debater.
Condensing a newspaper 
report; 
Summarising one of the topics 
in a recorded conversation; 
Writing postcards.
Expositions give information
or explanation in an ordered 
manner, with supporting 
evidence for each element.
Writing notices, job 
applications, expository 
essays, completing forms, 
explaining how things 
work; preparing notes for 
informational talks.
Making oral reports on 
Describing yourself to a pen 
pal; 
explaining how a sewing 
machine or car engine works; 
Expository essays, for example: 
Outlining two main problems of 
youth today.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 11
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
set/observed activities; giving 
reasoned responses to 
situations; giving 
reports/assessing activities to 
be delivered in limited time 
and words.
Vocabulary “games” relevant 
to specific situations.
The appropriateness of 
language for communicating 
factual information is 
largely dependent on the 
degree of formality 
(register) expected by the 
listener or reader.
Classifying the above items 
according to the degree or 
formality expected; 
rewriting inappropriately 
written items. 
(Process writing 
encourages writers to 
generate and arrange 
ideas, to seek feedback and 
to draft and redraft, before 
final proofreading).
Identifying inappropriate 
language use in an item and 
supplying appropriate 
alternatives.
Understanding (c) – Literary Discourse
Students should be able to grasp insights from reading literature by:
1. deducing reasons 
and motives for 
particular spoken 
and written 
communications 
(other than those 
with an overt 
persuasive intent);
Distinguishing between the 
purpose of the writer, the 
speaker, and the narrator. 
The narrator’s or the 
persona’s voice is not 
necessarily the author’s; thus 
two motivations may exist in 
the same piece of writing.
Exposing students to a 
wide range of oral and 
written extracts, for 
example, biography, 
autobiography, narrator 
independent from author; 
author speaking through a 
character; poems, fables, 
satire, where characters are 
often not human. 
Imitating styles of piece 
studied.
Identifying voice; point of view 
and commenting on 
effectiveness.
2. appreciating the 
appropriateness of 
different uses of 
tone, mood, 
register, code and 
style in talks and 
speeches, and in 
literary forms 
(prose, verse and 
drama), in relation 
to the author’s 
intention;
Tone: attitude expressed by 
the speaker or “voice”, mood 
or atmosphere: emotion 
conveyed in a work; register: 
selection of language in 
indicating level of formality; 
code: language peculiar to a 
specific group; style: manner 
of statement, including form,
structure, language.
Reading and listening to a 
range of literary and non￾literary material, including 
poems, short stories, 
novels, plays, movies and 
TV items, newspaper, 
magazines, manuals. 
Identifying elements and 
evaluating their 
appropriateness. (This is 
an ongoing process, not 
restricted to English 
classes).
Reading and dramatising 
pieces; Writing evaluative 
comments.
Comparing and contrasting 
selections on the same issue, for 
example, literary and non-literary 
prose extracts; poems and drama 
extracts; poems and prose extracts.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 12
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
Interpretative dramatisation 
of selections (all genres). This 
is not limited to the original 
piece but must be allowed to 
include the students’ 
interpretations that may 
produce new versions. View 
DVDs with alternative 
conclusions and discuss 
changes in meaning effected.
3. detecting 
connotations in the 
use of words and in 
the presentation of 
ideas and 
distinguishing 
between 
connotative and 
denotative 
meaning; 
Connotative: emotional, 
cultural, social associations 
given to words; 
Denotative: standard 
meaning necessary for 
precise understanding of 
meaning. (See also 
Understanding (b) 8 overleaf). 
 
Learning effective use of 
dictionary; exploring 
meanings of words in 
current use; slang, jargon; 
studying effect of word 
choice and shades of 
meaning on slant and bias 
in speech or writing (for 
example, about gender, 
race, politics, religion, 
culture). 
Regular practice in 
identifying and assessing 
the effects of an increasing 
range of devices; students 
creating effects by using 
their own devices in 
descriptive writing. 
Small group activities: 
reading circles and book 
clubs; Book reviews.
Ranking words according to 
their negative and positive 
connotations;
Identifying bias in given 
examples;
Identifying reasons for effect 
produced in examples of biased 
writing or speech. 
4. detecting and 
assessing the apt use 
of devices such as 
pun, innuendo, 
exaggeration, irony 
and symbolism;
Importance of 
understanding why a 
particular device is used and 
its effect on meaning.
Reading specifically to detect 
hidden meanings. Listening 
to song lyrics (for example: 
calypso, dub) to understand 
meanings.
Identifying and explaining the 
effect of devices in given 
written passages, oral extracts.
5. recognising and 
responding to the 
appropriateness or 
otherwise of the 
medium, including 
form and structure, 
used by a speaker, 
director or author 
to achieve the 
intended effect of a 
talk or speech, 
letter, article or 
Identification and use of 
verse, stanza, dialogue, 
reported speech, 
punctuation, formal and 
informal writing, first and 
third person narratives, 
flashbacks, acts, stage 
directions.
Exposure to a variety of 
material to show the range 
of forms and structure 
found in written and 
spoken statement.
Study of folk expressions – 
West Indian and others (all 
contributors to Caribbean 
culture). 
Identifying and describing 
form and structure found in 
given examples; Imitating 
models of form and structure 
with new content.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 13
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
essay, poem, novel, 
story or play; 
6. visualising the 
situation, attitudes, 
mood and setting of 
a play and 
appreciating how 
they influence the 
actions and 
interaction of actors 
in the performance 
of that play;
Recognition of the 
importance of the director 
and actors to the 
interpretation of a script; the 
need for the reader of a play 
to visualise it in 
performance.
Seeing a play or film 
(especially one that has 
been read) performed on 
stage or screen; Acting 
parts of a play in class; 
practice in reading parts; 
investigating aspects of 
putting on plays: casting, 
set design, costumes, 
props, advertising.
Internet research to locate 
and study pictures of 
unfamiliar places; 
Visits to galleries/study of 
print/photo collections.
Identifying and explaining 
differences between a text and 
movie of the text;
Explaining links between 
setting, action, motives, 
character;
Directing a scene with fellow 
students.
7. recognising implicit 
themes;
Theme: a dominant view, or 
one of the recurring ideas, 
stated or implied in a work, 
for example, love, jealousy, 
heroism, freedom.
Identifying and defining 
underlying ideas in a text 
in small groups or 
individually. 
Identifying and tracing themes; 
Assessing a theme’s importance 
to the plot, with supporting 
evidence.
8. responding to good 
literature (West 
Indian and other 
literature in 
English): novels 
short stories, poems 
and plays; making 
critical appraisal of 
values and 
concepts
expressed in 
literature, and 
relating these to
everyday living.
Literature – a reflection of 
life-experience as well as a 
vicarious extension and 
enrichment of it; a means of 
evaluating personal values 
and those expressed in 
literature, and sometimes 
forming new values.
Identifying (in group 
discussion and individual 
writing) values 
encountered in texts; 
evaluate them on (a) 
personal, (b) social, and (c) 
ethical levels.
Identifying values expressed in 
texts; Assessing these with 
reasons and supporting 
opinions; 
Assessing identity of a 
character and explaining 
motivation.
Expression (c) – Literary Discourse
Students should derive aesthetic satisfaction from creative writing by:
1. organising and 
sequencing ideas to 
Exploring various forms of 
self-statement, spoken and 
Writing and reading 
stories, verse, dramatic Submitting outline, drafts and 
fair copy of imaginative piece, 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 14
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
communicate 
emotions and 
imaginative 
interpretations of 
experience;
written, give opportunities 
for development and 
discovery; this applies 
particularly when efforts are 
shared, and benefit from 
audience feedback, and 
revision.
scenes, possibly after 
discussion of personal 
experience, a topical event, 
or some other stimulus.
for assessment of both final 
product and process of writing; 
Practising independent 
revision of imaginative writing 
done under test conditions.
2. recognise the 
various literary 
devices and their 
contribution to 
meaning and 
demonstrate an 
ability to interpret, 
at various levels 
different creative 
works.
Metaphors, simile, proverbs 
and other idiomatic 
expressions across genres.
Discussion of meaning in 
works which use the 
devices well; 
Assessment of such devices 
and their contribution to 
meaning.
(See Understanding c Item 4). 
Identify the devices as used in 
various works; 
Creating short stories/poems 
which use and respond to such 
devices. 
Reading aloud to demonstrate 
understanding of the work 
which use the devices. 
3. using language 
(tone, mood, 
register, code and 
style) appropriate to 
particular situations 
and contexts.
Effective speech and writing 
both depend on the 
suitability of word choice 
and style to the subject, to 
the situation, and to the 
people being addressed.
See tone, mood, register, 
code and style in 
Understanding 2 overleaf.
Evaluating different 
imaginative and real 
situations to determine 
what use of language is 
appropriate for narrator, 
character.
Writing relevant statements in 
language suited to different 
speakers, situations.
Understanding (d) Persuasive Discourse
Students should be able to recognise and evaluate opinion(s) expressed in various forms. This involves the ability to: 
 
 
1. distinguish factual 
statements from 
opinion expressed 
in various forms;
If assertions are capable of 
being verified (factual, even 
if shown to be false), the 
appeal is to reason and the 
audience can use its 
judgment; if opinions are 
given without grounds which 
can be verified then they are 
unreliable.
Identifying and analyzing 
statements of different 
kinds of prepared passages, 
and in advertisements, 
letters to the editor, 
reviews, sports reports; 
removing all but logical 
arguments from prepared 
persuasive passage, 
listening to and viewing 
tapes of speeches.
Reading court reports and 
reports on trials.
Studying short proposals, 
paying attention to structure 
and reasoning.
Identifying verifiable and 
unverifiable statements in a 
passage. Judging the 
soundness of selected verifiable 
assertions. Identifying the 
more reasonable (logically 
presented) of two persuasive 
passages.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 15
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
2. detect connotations 
in the use of words 
and in the 
presentation of 
ideas;
Bias and slant may be 
detected in the choice of 
words, especially those 
carrying relevant 
connotations.
Discussion of the effect of 
loaded expressions in 
advertisements and other 
persuasive material.
Comparing two accounts 
of the same event and 
descriptions of the same 
scene from different points of 
view.
Identifying and evaluating the 
persuasive effect of given 
devices.
3. evaluate the 
effectiveness of 
language devices 
used to persuade;
Rhetorical questions, 
repetitions, hyperbole, 
litotes, irony, sarcasm, 
paradox, oxymoron, pathetic 
fallacy, rhyme and other 
devices of sound, and 
figurative language.
Identifying each device in 
persuasive material 
provided, discussing 
persuasive effects in 
context.
Identifying and evaluating the 
persuasive effect of given 
devices.
4. recognise the range 
of techniques of 
persuasion 
employed in social 
intercourse and by 
the mass media and 
assess the persuasive 
effects.
Appeals to authority, desires, 
fears and other emotions; 
use of statistics; association 
of ideas; contrast, ridicule; 
rhetorical questions and 
other language devices; 
visual and auditory effects.
Discuss likely reasons for 
the use of particular 
techniques in 
advertisements and 
campaigns; identify 
various techniques in 
persuasive material 
recalled or shown in class.
Study proposals and reports to 
see how tables, charts are 
used.
Using the Internet, study 
video clips to note how visuals 
are used to persuade.
Identifying examples of 
techniques in given persuasive 
items; explaining the purpose 
of the technique used in a 
given example; analysing and 
assessing the effectiveness of a 
piece of persuasive language.
 
Expression (d) – Persuasive Discourse
Students should be able to communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or dissuades 
effectively, namely:
1. present reasoned 
evaluative 
comments on 
Reasoned opinions draw 
their conclusions logically on 
the basis of facts. Giving 
Supporting opinions with 
reasons; providing sound 
reasons for agreeing or 
Stating a position for example 
on new transport and traffic 
proposals, community projects 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 16
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
proposals and 
situations of various 
kinds, in language 
that is clear and 
appropriate to the 
occasion;
opinions, which others may 
not agree with, requires fact.
disagreeing with 
suggestions; practising 
inoffensive ways of 
complaining, disagreeing.
Preparing persuasive 
arguments for specific contexts
(home/school). 
Constructing and supporting 
proposals. 
Role play (impromptu) 
arguments for and against.
and institutions) orally (in a 
meeting) or in a letter to the 
newspaper Editor.
2. demonstrate the 
ability to employ, 
wherever necessary, 
a range of 
persuasive 
techniques for 
emotional impact;
Psychological persuasion is 
used, not only to manipulate 
people into buying goods or 
supporting beliefs, but to 
warn those in danger and to 
strengthen those in distress.
Advertising a product (a) 
deceptively and (b) 
responsibly, identifying 
situations where 
persuasion targeting 
emotions may be justified; 
practising such persuasion 
in speech and writing.
Writing advertising copy to 
dissuade children from using 
illegal drugs; writing to a 
disillusioned teenaged relative 
to persuade him or her not to 
give up hope.
3. present a logical 
argument using 
justifiable 
techniques related 
to sound or a hand 
written debate.
Serious argumentative essays 
and speeches emphasise 
reason over emotion, though 
they may be made more 
attractive by the occasional 
use of emotive appeals. Both 
sides of an issue are 
recognised, and the writer 
makes his or her stance clear.
Practice in generalising 
from appropriate evidence, 
and deducing logically 
from facts, debating issues, 
and writing items to 
persuade with a minimum 
of emotional appeal, and 
with opposing views noted 
and answered.
Writing argumentative essay, 
letters, and media articles and 
commentaries.
Discussing the effectiveness of 
chosen advertisements.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 17
♦ OTHER ENGLISH A EXAMINATION
Candidates taking this subject will not be required to submit an SBA. They will be assessed by external 
examination only. Mastery of knowledge and skills embodied in the subject content will be assessed under 
two profile dimensions. 
1. Profile Dimension 1: Understanding
The skills to be examined under this profile dimension are the ability to:
(a) understand meaning conveyed in reading, through word choice, grammar, punctuation 
and paragraphing, and to obtain information accurately;
(b) grasp insights from reading literature;
(c) evaluate opinions expressed in various forms.
2. Profile Dimension 2: Expression
The skills to be examined under this profile dimension are the ability to:
(a) communicate factual information clearly, concisely, and adequately in giving written
instructions, reports, summaries, and expositions in appropriate language;
(b) give aesthetic satisfaction to others in personal, creative and imaginative language;
(c) communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or 
dissuades effectively.
As the syllabus implies, all students have the same basic language needs and will be called on in social 
intercourse to utilise the same range of language skills.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 18
OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH A
Paper 01 (1 hour 30 minutes - 24% of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper 
This paper consists of 60 compulsory multiple-choice items arranged in two sections. Section One
consists of 20 discrete items and Section Two consists of 40 reading comprehension items based on 
five stimuli as follows:
one poem; one narrative extract; one expository extract; one persuasive extract (for example, an advertisement or a 
speech or a letter to the editor); one visual extract (for example, tables, diagrams, maps, conventional sign and 
symbols, cartoons, advertisement).
 
2. Mark Allocation
(a) One mark will be assigned for each question.
(b) The total number of marks available for this paper is 60.
(c) This paper contributes 24% towards the final assessment.
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 1 as follows: 
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to understand meaning conveyed through
word choice, grammar, syntax, sentence structure, punctuation and paragraphing.
In Section Two, marks will be awarded for the ability to (i) obtain information accurately, (ii) grasp 
insights from reading literature and (iii) recognise and evaluate opinions expressed in various 
forms.
Paper 02 (2 hours and 30 minutes – 76% of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper
This paper is divided into the following four sections:
Section One consists of one compulsory question.
Section Two consists of two compulsory short-answer reading comprehension questions.
Section Three consists of three questions. Two questions require candidates to produce short 
stories and one requires a descriptive essay. Candidates must do only one of the three questions.
Section Four consists of two argumentative essay questions. Candidates must attempt one 
question.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 19
2. Mark Allocation
(a) Section One is worth 30 marks.
(b) Each reading comprehension test in Section Two is worth 15 marks (total 30 marks).
(c) Section Three is worth 35 marks.
(d) Section Four is worth 35 marks. 
(e) This paper is worth 130 marks, and contributes 76% towards the final assessment. 
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 1, as follows:
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to:
(a) use appropriate grammatical forms, and suitable punctuation and paragraphing to convey 
meaning clearly and with facility;
(b) communicate factual information clearly, concisely, and adequately in written instructions, 
reports and summaries in appropriate language.
In Section Two, marks will be awarded for the candidate’s ability to: 
(c) understand meaning conveyed in reading, through word choice, grammar, punctuation 
and paragraphing; 
(d) obtain information accurately;
(e) grasp insights from reading literature; and 
(f) recognise and evaluate opinions expressed in various forms.
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 2, as follows:
 
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to (i) use appropriate grammatical forms, and 
suitable punctuation and paragraphing to convey meaning clearly and with facility and (ii) use 
appropriate language and communicate factual information clearly, concisely and adequately in writing 
reports and summaries. 
 
In Section Three, marks will be awarded for the ability to give aesthetic satisfaction to others in 
personal, creative and imaginative language.
In Section Four, marks will be awarded for the ability to communicate personal opinion clearly 
and cogently in language which effectively persuades or dissuades.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 20
Tables 1 and 2 present a summary of the assessment scheme for the English A Syllabus. 
Assessment Grids for English A Examinations
Table 1 - Marks Allocated to Examination Components
Paper Component 
(Questions)
Profile 1 
Understanding 
Profile 2 
Expression
EXAMINATION
01 1-60 60 (24%) - 60 (24%)
02 
Section I (Qu. 1) 10 (4%) 20 (13.33%) 30 (17.33%)
Section II (Qu. 2, 3) 30 (12%) - 30 (12%)
Section III (Qu. 4,5,6) - 35 (23.33%) 35 (23.33%)
Section IV (Qu. 7,8) - 35 (23.33%) 35 (23.33%)
EXAMINATION - 100 (40%) 90 (60%) 190 (100%)
Marks in Table 1 above are weighted so that they contribute to the overall examinations the proportions 
shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2 - Weighting of Examination Components - English A
Profile 1
Understanding
Profile 2
Expression
Composite
Paper 01
(1 hour 30 minutes) 24% - 24%
Paper 02 
(2 hours 30 minutes) 16% 60% 76%
Examination 
(4 hours) 40% 60% 100%
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 21
♦ THE ENGLISH B EXAMINATION
INTRODUCTION 
In English B, teachers guide students to explore how writers, poets and dramatists craft their work to influence our 
feelings and thoughts about life. Literature is a storehouse of humankind’s collective imagination and ideas. As 
teachers guide students to explore the rich world of literature they are confronted with many facets of the human 
experience as presented by literary artists. Historical, current or future events may stimulate them to peer into the 
mirror of shared psychological and social realities. This exposure supports students forging national and personal 
identities and creates a heightened sense of appreciation for the commonalities and differences in our human experience.
 
The exploration of literature is intended to foster students’ awareness on how writers create their literary worlds; to 
encourage students to make critical evaluations of those attitudes, values and beliefs that are portrayed and to develop 
in students a sense of empathy as they see their own humanity reflected in literary characters and situations.
EXAMINATION
The English B examination is intended to provide a test of the skills outlined below and those general skills 
listed on page 3 of the syllabus under Understanding (c). Together with the English A examinations, this will 
provide a complete test of the full range of skills which the integrated syllabus is designed to develop.
It is designed to be a test of candidates’ acquisition of those skills that would enable them to understand how 
literature functions and to pursue the study of literature at an advanced level.
The examination is designed to test a range of skills which include:
1. the ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgements, states of consciousness and 
other concepts explored in literature, and to relate these to everyday living;
2. description (the outlining of relevant content), analysis (the ability to break down, select and comment on 
the significance of relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to bring together and condense in a new 
form information drawn from various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular 
question);
3. the ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses 
in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism;
4. the ability to produce balanced critical analyses;
5. the ability to recognise the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour); 
6. the ability to recognise and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text;
7. the ability to grasp concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 22
OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH B
English B is assessed under three profile dimensions: Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction.
1. Profile Dimension 1 – Drama
This profile dimension will emphasise the study, teaching, and understanding of drama as a 
discrete literary genre. Although, it shares literary elements with the other literary genres, it possesses 
elements that are unique to drama, for example:
(a) performance as its main vehicle;
(b) stage directions;
(c) character; 
(d) spectacle;
(e) the development of character, theme, and atmosphere through elements such as lighting 
costuming, stage prop. 
Such dramatic elements ought to be the primary focus of teaching and study.
2. Profile Dimension 2 – Poetry
This profile dimension will emphasise the study, teaching, and understanding of poetry as a 
discrete literary genre. Although, it shares literary elements with the two other literary genres, there 
are elements specific to poetry, such as:
(a) fixed forms, metre, rhythm and rhyme;
(b) the economy of language;
(c) the organic relationship between sound and sense;
(d) the figurative language employed to give the poem levels of meaning. 
Such elements ought to be the primary focus of the teaching and study of poetry.
3. Profile Dimension 3 – Prose Fiction
Prose Fiction is more often than not the most expansive and experimental of the literary genres and 
it is for many the most accessible. Following are some of the elements of prose fiction that must be 
studied, taught, and understood: 
(a) narrative technique and the use of first-person and third-person narrators;
(b) structure, that is, the way in which a work of prose fiction is put together, for example, 
whether it is an unbroken narrative, or a narrative divided into chapters, or into larger 
sections or more than one narrative put together to form a longer narrative; 
(c) the difference between narration and description;
(d) the presentation of humankind in a social setting;
(e) characterisation; 
(f) themes. 
Such elements ought to be the primary focus of the teaching and study of the novel and the short 
story.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 23
In each of the three literary genres the following skills will be tested:
1. Understanding
Knowledge of Text and Insight
 
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of examples 
2. Expression
(a) Organisation of Response
(i) Structure and development of responses
(ii) Clear and logical argument
(b) Quality of Language
(i) Clarity and appropriateness of expression used
(ii) Mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling)
ASSESSMENT DETAILS 
Paper 01 (1 hour 30 minutes - 36 % of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper 
 All questions are compulsory. This paper will consist of three questions, one question from each 
genre – drama, poetry and prose fiction. In each question candidates will be required to give 
approximately 5 - 7 short answers. 
 
2. Mark Allocation
(a) Twenty marks will be allocated for each question in this paper.
(b) The total number of marks available for this paper is 60. 
(c) This paper contributes 36% to the whole examination.
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded in each profile dimension for relevance and accuracy of content, relevance 
and accuracy of illustration, and quality and clarity of argument.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 24
Paper 02 (2 hours – 64% of Total Assessment) – (reading time – 10 minutes) 
1. Composition of Paper 
This paper is divided into the three sections:
(a) Section ONE – Drama (Shakespeare and Modern Drama). This section consists of four 
Type A questions, two from each text. Thirty-five marks are allocated for each question. 
Candidates must answer one question from this section.
(b) Section TWO – Poetry (a selection of poems – two questions). This section consists of two 
Type B questions, one generic question allowing candidates to use two appropriate choices from the 
prescribed poems and one question based on two named poems from the prescribed list. Thirty-five
marks are allocated for each question. Candidates must answer one question from this 
section.
(c) Section THREE – Prose Fiction (EITHER West Indian novel OR other novels in English 
OR West Indian short story and other short stories in English). This section consists of six 
questions: four Type A questions, two on each prescribed novel and two Type B questions, one 
generic question allowing candidates to use two appropriate choices from the prescribed short stories 
and one question based on two named short stories from the prescribed list. Thirty-five marks are 
allocated for each question. Candidates must answer one question from this section.
2. Number of Questions
This paper consists of 12 optional extended-essay questions arranged under the three sections 
outlined above. There are two types of questions in this paper:
Type A - Questions that require knowledge and study of one text;
Type B – Questions of comparison that require knowledge and study of two poems or short stories.
Candidates will be required to answer a total of THREE questions, one from EACH section. 
3. Mark Allocation
Each question will be worth 35 marks. This paper is worth 105 marks. 
4. Award of Marks
Candidates are expected to show knowledge, insight, quality of argument, and organisation of 
response. 
Marks will be awarded for relevance and accuracy of content, relevance and accuracy of illustration 
and quality and clarity of argument. Marks will also be awarded for the structure and development 
of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs, and for competence in the mechanics of 
writing.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 25
Organisation of Paper 02 
Drama [Section One]
Question 1 Type A question [35 marks] 
Question 2 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 3 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 4 Type A question [35 marks]
Poetry [Section Two]
Question 1 Type B question [35 marks]
Question 2 Type B question [35 marks]
Prose Fiction [Section Three] Novel
Question 1 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 2 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 3 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 4 Type A question [35 marks]
Short Stories
Question 5 Type B question [35 marks]
Question 6 Type B question [35 marks]
The outline of the assessment scheme above and Table 1 overleaf are presented to describe and summarise 
the assessment design for English B.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 26
Relevant to 2012 – 2017 Assessment Grids for English B Examination Table 1: Marks Allocated to Examination Components Proficiency Profile Paper 01 Paper 02 Composite General
Drama 20 
(12.12%)
35 
(21.21%)
55 
(33.33%)
Poetry 20 
(12.12%)
35 
(21.21%)
55 
(33.33%)
Prose Fiction 20 
(12.12%
35 
(21.21%)
 55 
 (33.33%)
Total 60 
(36%)
105 
(64%)
165 
(100%)
Time 1 hour 30 minutes 2 hours 10 minutes 3 hours 40 minutes
Table 2: Weighting of Examination Components – English B
 Drama Poetry Prose Fiction Components
Paper 01 1 hour 30 minutes 12.12% 12.12% 12.12% 36% 
Paper 02 2 hours 10 minutes 21.21% 21.21% 21.21% 64% 
Examination 3 hours 40 minutes 33.33% 33.33% 33.33% 100%
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 27
♦ PRESCRIBED TEXTS FOR ENGLISH B
TEXTS PRESCIBED FOR THE 2012 - 2014 EXAMINATIONS ARE AS FOLLOWS
TEXT AUTHOR OR EDITOR DRAMA Four Questions will be set
A Midsummer Night’s Dream William Shakespeare
Old Story Time Trevor Rhone
POETRY 
Two Questions will be set
Selections from A World of Poetry for CXC Hazel Simmons-McDonald and
(New Edition) Mark McWatt
Poems Prescribed for the 2012 – 2014 Examinations are as Follows Two type B Questions will be set TEXT AUTHOR
A Contemplation Upon Flowers Henry King
Once Upon a Time Gabriel Okara
Forgive My Guilt Robert P. Tristram Coffin
West Indies, U.S.A. Stewart Brown
Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge William Wordsworth
Orchids Hazel Simmons-McDonald
The Woman Speaks to the Man who has Lorna Goodison
 Employed Her Son 
It is the Constant Image of your Face Dennis Brutus
God’s Grandeur Gerard Manley Hopkins
A Stone’s Throw Elma Mitchell
Test Match Sabina Park Stewart Brown
Theme for English B Langston Hughes
Dreaming Black Boy James Berry
Epitaph Dennis Scott
Dulce et Decorum Est Wilfred Owen
This is the Dark Time, My Love Martin Carter
Ol’Higue Mark McWatt
‘Le Loupgarou’ Derek Walcott
South Kamau Brathwaite
To an Athlete Dying Young A.E. Housman
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 28
PROSE FICTION 
Novel – Four Type A questions will be set. West Indian
Songs of Silence Curdella Forbes
The Wine of Astonishment Earl Lovelace
Short Story - Two Type B Questions will be set from the ten named short stories 
Selections from A World of Prose for CXC David Williams and
(New Edition) Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Short Stories Prescribed for the 2012 – 2014 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
Blackout Roger Mais
Shabine Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Emma Carolyn Cole
The Man of the House Frank O’Connor
Septimus John Wickham
The Day the World Almost Came to an End Pearl Crayton
The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream Olive Senior
Berry Langston Hughes
Mom Luby and the Social Worker Kristin Hunter
To Da-duh, in Memoriam Paule Marshall
 
TEXTS PRESCRIBED FOR THE 2015 – 2017 EXAMINATIONS ARE AS 
FOLLOWS
TEXT AUTHOR DRAMA 
Four Type A Questions will be set
Julius Caesar William Shakespeare
The Lion and the Jewel Wole Soyinka
POETRY Two Type B Questions will be set
Selections from A World of Poetry Hazel Simmons-McDonald and 
(New Edition) Mark McWatt
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 29
Poems Prescribed for the 2015 – 2017 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
A Contemplation Upon Flowers Henry King
Once Upon a Time Gabriel Okara
Forgive My Guilt Robert P. Tristram Coffin
West Indies, U.S.A. Stewart Brown
Sonnet Composed Upon Westminister Bridge William Wordsworth
Orchids Hazel Simmons-McDonald
The Woman Speaks to the Man who has Lorna Goodison 
 Employed Her Son 
It is the Constant Image of your Face Dennis Brutus
A Lesson for this Sunday Derek Walcott
A Stone’s Throw Elma Mitchell
Test Match Sabina Park Stewart Brown
Theme for English B Langston Hughes
Dreaming Black Boy James Berry
Death Came to see me in Hot Pink Pants Heather Royes
Dulce et Decorum Est Wilfred Owen
This is the dark time, my love Martin Carter
Ol’Higue Mark McWatt
‘Le Loupgarou’ Derek Walcott
South Kamau Brathwaite
Because I could not stop for Death Emily Dickinson
PROSE FICTION Novel – Four Type A questions will be set.
Frangipani House Beryl Gilroy
Things Fall Apart Chinua Achebe
Short Story - Two Type B questions will be set from the ten named short stories.
Selections from A World of Prose for CXC David Williams and
(New Edition) Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Short Stories Prescribed for the 2015 – 2017 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
Raymond’s Run Tony Cade Bambara
Shabine Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Emma Carolyn Cole
The Man of the House Frank O’Connor
Georgia and Them There United States Velma Pollard
The Day the World Almost Came to an End Pearl Crayton
The Two Grandmothers Olive Senior
Berry Langston Hughes
Mom Luby and the Social Worker Kristin Hunter
To Da-duh, in Memoriam Paule Marshall 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 30
♦ SUGGESTED READING LIST 
(For selecting literature for class study and library reading)
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
NOVELS
Achebe, Chinua Arrow of God Heinemann 5 
Adams, Douglas The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the 
Galaxy
Ballantine Books of 
Canada
3 and 4 
Adams, Richard Watership Down Penguin 3, 4 and 5
Adler, Elizabeth The King's Shadow Tandem Library 4 and 5
Aidoo, Ama The Dilemma of a 
Ghost/Anowa
Longman 4 and 5
Aiken, Joan Night Fall Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston
4
Akpabot, Anne Aduke Makes Her Choice Nelson 4 and 5
Alcott, Louisa May Eight Cousins 1st World Library Literary 
Society
1 and 2
Allen, Eric The Latchkey Children Heinemann Educational 1 
Allende, Isabel City of the Beasts Harper Collins 3, 4 and 5 
Altmann, Martina Jeremiah, Devil of the Woods Pan Macmillan 1 and 2
Amadi, Elechi The Concubine Heinemann 4 and 5 
Amis, Kingsley Lucky Jim Victor Gollancz 4 and 5
Anaya, Rudolfo Bless Me, Ultima Grand Central Publishing 4 and 5
Angelou, Maya I Know Why the Caged Bird 
Sings
Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Anne, Frank Centre Anne Frank: Beyond the 
Diary
Puffin 4 and 5
Anthony, Michael Green Days by the River Heinemann 4 and 5
Apple, Arnold Son of Guyana Oxford University Press 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 31
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Armstrong, William H. Sounder HarperCollins 1 and 2
Austen, Jane Emma Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Ba, Marianna So Long a Letter Heinemann 5 
Bagnold, Enid National Velvet Morrow 1 
Baldwin, James Go Tell It on the Mountain Delta Trade Paperbacks 
 
5 
Ballard, J. Empire of the Sun Heinemann 3
Banks, Lynne Reid One More River Valentine, Mitchell 3
Blume, Judy Are You There God? It's Me, 
Margaret
Simon & Schuster 
Children’s Publishing
1 and 2
Bosse, Malcolm J. Ganesh Crowell 3
Braithwaite, E.R. To Sir With Love Signet Book 3 and 4
Brickhill, Paul The Dam Busters W. W. Norton 4 and 5 
Brontë, Charlotte Jane Eyre Penguin 4 and 5
Brontë, Emily Wuthering Heights Signet Classic 4 and 5 
Burnett, F. Hodgson The Secret Garden Signet Classic 1 
Butler, Octavia Kindred Beacon Press 4 and 5 
Byars, Betsy Cracker Jackson Puffin 1, 2, and 3 
Byrne, Donn Gandhi Longman 4 and 5 
Carpenter, Richard Catweazle Penguin 1 and 2
Carroll, Lewis Alice in Wonderland Digital Scanning Inc. 1
Chambers, Aidan The Present Takers Harper & Row 3, 4 and 5
Chesterton, G. K. The Man Who was Thursday Penguin 3 and 4
Chinodya, Shimmer Harvest of Thorns Heinemann 4 and 5
Christopher, John The Guardians Hamish Hamilton 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 32
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Cisneros, Sandra The House on Mango Street Vintage Books 2 and 3
Clarke, Arthur Dolphin Island Gollancz 1 and 2 
Cleary, Beverly Fifteen HarperCollins 2 
Cliff, Michelle Abeng Plume 4 and 5 
Collins, Merle Angel Seal Press 4 and 5 
Conly, Jane Lesley Rasco and Rats of Nimh Heinemann New 
windmills, Puffin
1, 2 and 3
Conrad, Joseph Lord Jim Courier Dover 
Publications
5
Cooper, J. California Family Anchor Books 4 and 5
Cooper, Susan Over Sea. Under Stone Puffin 1 and 2
Coppard, Yvonne Not Dressed Like that You 
Don’t
Piccadilly Press Ltd. 3
Cormier, Robert I am the Cheese Alfred Aknopf 5
Crane, Stephen The Red Badge of Courage Prentice Hall 5 
Craven, Margaret I Heard the Owl Call My 
Name
Dell 4 and 5 
D’Costa, Jean Escape to Last Man Peak Longman 1 
Dahl, Roald Matilda Penguin 1 
Darke, Marjorie The First of Midnight
A Long Way to Go
Seabury Press
Kestrel Books
3
3 
De Jong, Mendert The House of Sixty Fathers
The Wheel on the School
Harper & Row
Harper & Row
1 and 2
De Lisser, Herbert Jane's Career Heinemann 4 and 5
Defoe, Daniel Robinson Crusoe (Abridged) Penguin 2, 3 and 4
Desai, Anita The Village by the Sea Chivers 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 33
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Dickens, Charles A Christmas Carol
David Copperfield
(Abridged)*
Great Expectations
Oliver Twist (Abridged)
Macmillan
Gerald Duckworth & Co.
Pearson Education
Barnes & Noble
2 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
*Contained in the classics published by Longmans.
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan The Hound of the Baskervilles
The Return of Sherlock 
Holmes
Penguin
1st World Publishing
3
3 
Drayton, Godfrey Christopher Heinemann 1,2 and 3
Duder, Tessa Alex Oxford University Press 3
Dumas, Alexandre The Three Musketeers Wildside 2
Durrel, Gerald Three Singles to Adventure F.A. Thorpe 2
Edgell, Zee Beka Lamb
The Festival of San Joaquin
Heinemann
Heinemann
3, 4 and 5 
4 and 5
Ellison, Ralph The Invisible Man Sparknotes 5 
Ekwensi, Cyprian Burning Grass Heinemann 3 and 4 
Eliot, George Silas Marner: The Weaver of 
Raveloe
Kessinger 5 
Emecheta, Buchi The Joys of Motherhood Heinemann 4 and 5 
Fairclough, Peter Three Gothic Novels Penguin 4 and 5 
Faulkner, William Sanctuary Vintage International 4 and 5
Fisk, Nicholas Trillions Nelson 2
Fitzgerald, F. Scott The Great Gatsby Demco Media 5
Fitzhugh, Louise Harriet the Spy Random House Children 
Books
1
Forbes, Curdella Songs of Silence Heinemann 4 and 5
Foster, E. M. A Passage to India Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich
5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 34
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Francis, Dick Odds Against Berkley 4 and 5 
Gallico, Paul Jennie
The Small Miracle
The Snow Goose
Penguin
Doubleday
Knopf
1 
1 
1 
Garnett, Eve The Family from One-End 
Street
Further Adventures of the 
Family from One End Street
F. Muller
Penguin
1 
1 
George, Jean My Side of the Mountain Thorndike 1
Gilmore, Kate Of Griffins and Graffiti Penguin 3
Gilroy, Beryl Frangipani House
Boy Sandwich
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Godden, Rumer Listen to the Nightingale
Thursday’s Children
Penguin
Viking
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Goldsmith, Oliver The Vicar of Wakefield Wordsworth 4 and 5 
Gordimer, Nadine July’s Children Longman 4 and 5 
Grahame, Kenneth The Wind in the Willows Heinemann New 
Windmills, Methuen, 
Puffin, Wordsworth 
Publishers
1 and 2 
Green, Roger Lancelyn The Adventures of Robin 
Hood
King Arthur and His Knights 
of the Round Table
Myths of the Norsemen
Tales of Ancient Egypt
Tales of the Greek Heroes
The Luck of Troy
The Tale of Troy
Puffin
Penguin
Penguin
Sagebrush
Penguin
Penguin
Penguin
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Greene, Graham The Fallen Idol/The Third 
Man 
The Heart of the Master
Penguin
Heinmann, Mandarin, 
Penguin
4 and 5
5 
Guy, Rosa And I Heard A Bird Sing
Paris, Peewee and Big Dog
Delacorte
Orion 
3, 4 and 5
1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 35
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
The Disappearance Tandem 5
Haddon, Mark The Curious Incident of the Dog 
in the Night-time
Alexandria 4 and 5
Haggard, H. Rider King Solomon's Mines Wildside 3 
Hardy, Thomas Far from the Madding Crowd
The Mayor of Casterbridge
Tess of the D’Urbervilles
Plain Label 
Norton 
Reprint Services 
Corporation
4 and 5 
5 
5 
Harold, Gwyneth Bad Girls in School Heinemann 4 and 5
Hart, James V. The Novelisation Penguin 4 and 5
Hartley, L. P. The Go-Between Heinemann 4 and 5
Hautzig, Esther The Endless Steppe Penguin 3
Hawthorne, Nathaniel The Scarlet Letter Houghton Miffin 5
Head, Bessie Mary Heinemann 4 and 5
Hearne, John Voices Under the Window Pepal Tree 4 and 5 
Hemmingway, Ernest A Farewell to Arms
For whom the Bell Tolls
The Old Man and the Sea 
Charles Scribner’s Sons
Simon & Schuster 
Klett Ernst
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Hentoff, Nat The Day They Came to Arrest 
the Book
Dell 3 
Herriott, James All Creatures Great & Small
All Things Bright and 
Beautiful
All Things Wise and 
Wonderful
Every Living Thing
The Lord God Made Them All
St. Martin’s
Bantam 
St. Martin’s 
St. Martin’s 
St. Martin’s 
4 and 5
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Higgins, Jack The Eagle has Landed Penguin 4 and 5
Hines, Barry A Kestrel for a Knave Penguin 4 and 5
Hinton, S. E. The Outsiders
That Was Then, This Is Now
Lions Tracks
Turtleback
3,4 and 5 
4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 36
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Hodge, Merle Crick Crack Monkey 
For The Life of Laetitia
Heinemann
Farrar Straus and Giroux
3 
3, 4 and 5 
Holman, Felice Slake’s Limbo Aladdin Paperbacks 5 
Holme, Anne I am David Harcourt Children’s 
Books
1 
Hughes, Richard A High Wind In Jamaica Penguin 3
Huxley, Aldous Brave New World Klett Ernst 5
Imoja, Nailah Pick of the Crop Heinemann 4 and 5
James, C.L.R. Minty Alley University Press of 
Mississippi
4
James, Henry The Turn of the Screw
Portrait of a Lady
Courier Dover
Galley Press
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Jerome, J. K. Three Men in a Boat Kessinger 4 and 5
Johnson, Samuel History of Rasselas, Prince of 
Abyssinia
J. Limbird 4 and 5
Jones, Evan Skylarking Longman 1 
Jones, Toeckey Go Well, Stay Well Harper & Row 4 and 5 
Kanawa, Kiri Te and 
Foreman, Michael
Land of the Long White 
Cloud
Arcade 1 
Kastner, Erich Emil and the Detectives Overlook 1 
Kaye, M. M. The Ordinary Princess Penguin 1
Keyes, Daniel Flowers for Algemon Harcourt, Brace & World 4 and 5
Khan, Ismith The Jumbie Bird I. Obolensky 4 and 5
Kincaid, Jamaica Annie John Farrar, Straus & Giroux 2, 3 and 4
Kipling, Rudyard Jungle Book
The Second Jungle Book
1st World Publishing
Kessinger 
1
2 
L’Engle, Madeline A Wrinkle in Time Collins Educational 1 and 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 37
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Lamming, George In the Castle of My Skin University of Michigan 5 
Le Guin, Ursula A Wizard of Earth Sea
City of Illusions
Left Hand of God
Very Long Way From 
Anywhere Else
DemcoMedia 
Berkley
Longman
Harcourt
New Windmills
1, 2 and 3 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
3 
Lee, Harper To Kill a Mockingbird HarperCollins 4 and 5
Lessing, Doris The Grass is Singing Heinemann 5
Lester, Julius Basketball Game
Long Journey Home
To Be a Slave
Penguin
Dial Books
Penguin
3, 4 and 5
4 
3 and 4 
Lewis, C. Day The Otterbury Incident Putnam 2 and 3
Lewis, C. S. The Chronicles of Namia:
Book I: The Lion the 
Witch and the 
Wardrobe
Book II: Prince Caspian
Book III: The Voyage of the 
Book IV: The Silver Chair
Book V: The Horse and His
Boy
Book VI: The Magician’s 
Nephew
Book VII: The Last Battle
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Lindgren, Astrid Pippi Goes Abroad
Pippi Longstocking
Pippi in the South Seas
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
1
1 
1 
Lindsay, Joan Picnic at Hanging Rock Buccaneer 3, 4 and 5
Lingard, Joan The Guilty Party Penguin 1 and 2
Little, Jean Mama’s Going to Buy you a 
Mocking Bird
Penguin 1
Lively, Penelope A Stitch in Time Dutton 1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 38
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Lofting, Hugh
London, Jack
Doctor Doolittle
The Call of the Wild
White Fang
Tom Doherty 
Heinemann, Penguin, 
Wordsworth Publishers 
Heinemann New 
Windmills, Puffin
1 
1, 2 and 3 
2 
Lovelace, Earl The Schoolmaster
The Dragon Cant Dance
Wine of Astonishment
Heinemann
Persea 
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Lowry, Lois The Giver EMC 2 and 3
Maartens, Maretta Paper Bird Nelson 5
MacDonald, George At the Back of the North 
Wind
The Princess and the Curdie
The Princess and the Goblin
Kessinger
Kessinger
Kessinger
1
1 
1 
MacDonald, Ian The Hummingbird Tree Heinemann 4 and 5
MacKay, Claire The Minerva Programme Puffin 1
McKay, Claude Banana Bottom X Press 4
Mais, Roger Black Lightning
Brother Man
The Hills Were Joyful
Together
Heinemann
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Mankowitz, Wolf A Kid for Two Farthings ISIS 1 
Marshall, Alan I Can Jump Puddles Longman 3 
Marshall, James Vance A River Ran Out of Eden
Walkabout
Sundance
Sundance
2, 3, 4 and 5
2, 3, 4 and 5 
Marshall, Paule Reena and Other Stories
Brown Girl, Brownstones
Praise song for the Widow
Feminist
Feminist
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
4 
Matthews, P.E. State of the Heart Penguin 3
Maugham, W. S. The Razor’s Edge Vintage 4 and 5
McCormick, Patricia Sold Hyperion 3 and 4
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 39
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
McCutcheon, Elsie The Storm Bird Farrar, Straus, Giroux 4 and 5 
Meniru, Teresa Uzo Evans 3 
Milne, A. A. Winnie the Pooh Puffin 1 
Mittelholzer, Edgar Corentyne Thunder
My Bones and My Flute 
Heinemann
Longman
4 and 5 
4 
Monk Kidd, Sue The Secret Life of Bees Viking 2, 3 and 4 
Montgomery, L.M. Anne of Avonlea
Anne of Green Gables
Anne’s House of Dreams
Anne of Ingleside
Anne of the Island
Anne of Windy Willows
Courier Dover
1st World Publishing
Haynes Barton
Bantam 
Hayes Barton
Puffin
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Moore, Brian Lives of Silence Longman 4 and 5
Morrison, Toni Song of Solomon Vintage 5
Morrow, H. L. The Splendid Journey Harcourt Education 2 and 3
Munonye, John The Only Son Heinemann 3 
Naipaul, Shiva The Chip-Chip Gatherers Vintage 4 and 5 
Naipaul, V.S. A House for Mr. Biswas
Miguel Street
The Mimic Men
They Mystic Masseur 
The Suffrage of Elvira
Penguin
Heinemann
Deutsch 
Vintage 
Penguin
5 
3 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Narayan, R. K. The Guide
Man-Eater of Malgudi
Viking 
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Nash, Ogden Custard and Company Little Brown & Co. 2
Nesbit, E. The Complete Adventures of 
the Treasure Seekers
The Enchanted Castle
Five Children and It
The House of Arden
The Last of the Dragons and 
some Others
The Magic World
Puffin
Echo Library
Courier Dover
New York Review
Penguin
Penguin
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 40
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Nesbit, E. New Treasure Seekers
The Phoenix and the Carpet
The Railway Children
The Story of the Treasure
Seekers
The Wouldbegoods
Penguin
Kessinger
Courier Dover
Biblio Bazaar 
Kessinger
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Ngugi, James The River Between
Weep Not, Child
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Nicholls, Millis A Father for Christmas Nelson Caribbean 1
Norton, André Crystal Gryphon
Iron Cage
Atheneum 
Penguin 
1
1 and 2 
Norton, Mary The Borrowers
The Borrowers Afield
Borrowers Afloat
The Borrowers Avenged
Thorndike Press
Harcourt
Harcourt
Harcourt 
1
2 
2 
2 
Nwapa, Flora Efuru Heinemann 4 and 5
O’Brien, Robert Mrs Frisby and the Rats of 
Nimh
Z for Zachariah
Aladdin 
Simon Pulse 
4 and 5
4 and 5 
O’Dell, Scott Island of the Blue Dolphin
My Name is No Angelica
Streams to the River, River to 
Sea
HMco Children’s Books
HMco Children’s Books
Fawcett Juniper
3 and 4 
3 
3 
O’Hara, Mary My Friend, Flicka HarperCollins 1 
Okoro, Nathaniel The Twin Detectives Evans Bros 4 and 5 
Orwell, George Animal Farm Random House 4 and 5
Palmer, C. Everard A Cow Called Boy
Baba and Mr Big
Big Doc Bitterroot
My Father Sun Sun Johnson
The Cloud with the Silver 
Lining
The Hummingbird People
The Sun Salutes You
The Wooing of Beppo Tate
Macmillan
Collins 
Macmillan
Deutsch 
Macmillan
Deutsch 
Bobbs Merrill
Nelson Thornes
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 41
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Parris, Terry Jason Whyte Oxford University Press 1 
Paton, Alan Cry, The Beloved Country Spark 4 and 5 
Patterson, Orlando The Children of Sisyphus Bolivar 5 
Pausewang, Gudrun Fall-Out Viking 2, 3, 4 and 5 
Pearce, Phillipa A Dog So Small
Downhill All the Way
Who, Sir? Me, Sir?
Chivers North America
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
1 
2 
2 
Phillips, Marlene Nourbese Harriet's Daughter Heinemann 4 and 5
Poe, Edgar Allan Tales of Mystery and Terror Penguin 4 and 5
Pollard, Velma Homestretch Longman, Caribbean 3, 4 and 5
Ramsay, Paulette Aunt Jen Heinemann 4 and 5
Ransome, Arthur Swallows & Amazons David R. Godine 2
Redmond, Diane The Comic Strip Odyssey Penguin 1
Reid, V.S. Peter of Mount Ephraim
Sixty Five
The Leopard 
The Young Warriors
Jamaica Publishing House
Longman 
Viking 
Longman
2 
2 
4 
1 
Rhue, Morton The Wave Delacorte 4 
Rhys, Jean Wide Sargasso Sea W.W. Norton 4 and 5 
Rowling, J.K. The Harry Potter Series Scholastic Trade 1 through 5
Salinger, J.D. The Catcher in the Rye Little, Brown 4 and 5
Salkey, Andrew A Quality of Violence Hutchinson 5
Schaefer, Jack Shane HMco Children’s Books 2, 3, 4 and 5
Scott, Paul Staying On Avon 4 and 5
Selormey, Francis The Narrow Path Praeger 3, 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 42
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Selvon, Samuel A Brighter Sun
The Lonely Londoners
Ways of Sunlight
Longman 
Penguin 
Longman Kenya 
3 and 4 
4 and 5 
3 and 4 
Serrailler, Ian The Clashing Rocks
The Enchanted Island
The Road to Canterbury
The Silver Sword
The Way of Danger
Walck
Oxford University Press
Kestrel
Heinemann New 
Windmills
Oxford University Press
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Sewell, Anna Black Beauty Pearson Prentice Hall 1 and 2
Shelley, Mary Frankenstein Courier Dover 4 and 5
Sherlock, Philip M. The Iguana’s Tail
Three Finger Jack’s Treasure
Nelson 
St. Martin’s Press
1
1 
Shute, Nevil No Highway
Silver Sword
House of Stratus
Heinemann New
2 and 3
2 
Smith, Dodie The Hundred and One 
Dalmations
Viking 1 
Smith, Wilbur Elephant Song Random House 4 and 5 
Smucker, Barbara Underground to Canada Clarke, Irwin 1 
Spark, M. The Prime of Ms Jean
Brodie
Penguin 4 and 5 
Sparks, Beatrice It Happened to Nancy: A True 
Story from the Diary of a 
Teenager
Bt. Bound 3, 4 and 5 
Sperry, Armstrong The Boy Who Was Afraid Heinemann 1
St. Omer, Garth Lights on the Hill Heinemann 4 and 5
St. Rose, Marlene Into the Mosaic Athen 1, 2 and 3 
Steinbeck, John Cannery Row
Of Mice and Men 
The Red Pony
The Grapes of Wrath 
The Pearl
Penguin
Penguin
Penguin
Modern Library
Bantam
4 and 5
4 and 5 
3 
4 and 5 
3
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 43
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Stevenson, R. L. Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
Kidnapped (Abridged) 
Treasure Island
Bantam 
Signet Classic
Oxford University Press 
2 
2 
1 and 2 
Stoker, Bram Dracula Signet Classic 4 and 5 
Storr, Catherine The Boy and the Swan Deutsch 2 
Stowe, Harriet Beecher Uncle Tom’s Cabin Prentice 3 and 4
Stratton, Allan Chanda’s Secrets Longman 4 and 5
Streatfield, Noel Ballet Shoes Random House 1
Stuart, Morna Marassa and Midnight Heinemann 1, 2 and 3
Sutcliff, Rosemary Dawn Wind
The Mark of the Horse Lord
Three Legions
Oxford University Press
Front 
Oxford University Press
2 and 3 
2 and 3 
2 
Swarthout, Glendon Bless the Beasts and Children Doublday 3
Swift, Jonathan Gulliver’s Travels
(Abridged)
Nelsons 3 
Taylor, Mildred Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry Puffin 2 and 3 
Taylor, Theodore The Cay
Timothy of the Cay
Laurel Leaf
Harcourt
1 and 2 
1 and 2 
Temple, Francis The Ramsay Scallop Harper Trophy 3,4 and 5 
Theroux, Paul A Christmas Card Puffin 1
Tolkien, J. R. R. The Hobbit Houghton Mifflin 3
Twain, Mark The Prince and the Pauper
The Adventures of 
Huckleberry Finn
Penguin
Dent, Heinemann, 
Longman, Penguin 
Heinemann, Nelson, 
Penguin
2
4 and 5 
2, 3 and 4 
Ullstein, Susan Martin Luther King
Mother Theresa
Longman
Gareth Stevens
5
5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 44
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Van Der Leoff, A. R. Avalanche
Children of the Oregon Trail
Penguin
Puffin
2 
2 
Verne, Jules Around the World in Eighty 
Days
The Mysterious Island
Puffin
Signet
2 
2 
Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea
Dodo Press 2 
Walker, Alice The Color Purple The Women’s Press 5
Warner, Rex Greeks and Trojans
Men and Gods 
Heinemann New 
Windmills
NYRB Classics
2
1 and 2 
Waugh, Evelyn A Handful of Dust Penguin 4 and 5
Webster, Jean Daddy Long Legs Penguin 2 and 3
Westall, Robert The Machine Gunners Heinemann 5
Wharton, Edith The Age of Innocence Signet 4 and 5
White, Patrick The Aunt’s Story
The Tree of Man
Trafalgar Square
Vintage
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Wiggin, K. D. Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm Penguin 4 and 5 
Wilde, Oscar The Happy Prince and Other 
Stories
The Picture of Dorian Gray
Dover 
Prestwick House Inc.
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Wilder, Laura Farmer Boy
Little House in the Big Woods
Little House on the Prairie
Harper Trophy
Harper Fastival
Harper Trophy 
1
1 
1 
Williams, Tennessee The Glass Menagerie Penguin 4 and 5
Williamson, Henry Tarka the Otter Puffin 1
Wodehouse, P.G. Lord Emsworth Acts for the 
Best
The Collected Blandings
Short Stories
Penguin
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 45
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Woodford, Pegy Misfits Heinemann New 
Windmills
3 
Wright, Richard Native Son Blooms Literary Criticism 4 and 5 
Wyndham, John The Chrysalids Penguin 4 and 5 
Wyss, J. D. The Swiss Family Robinson Signet 1 and 2 
ANTHOLOGIES OF SHORT STORIES AND/OR EXCERPTS FROM NOVELS
West Indian
Adler, Sue Mightier Than the Lipstick Penguin 5
Anthony, Michael Cricket In the Road
The Chieftain’s Carnival and 
Other Stories
Deutsch 
Longman
1
4 and 5 
Black, C. V. Tales of Old Jamaica Collins 3
Collins, Merle Rain Darling Women’s Press 4 
Ellis, Zoila On Heroes, Lizards and Passion Cubola Productions 2, 3, and 4
Faustin, Charles Under the Storyteller’s Spell: 
Folk Tales from the Caribbean
Puffin, Viking 1 
Goodison, Lorna Baby Mother and the King of 
Swords
Longman 4 
Gordimer, Nadine Some Monday for Sure Heinemann 4 and 5
Gray, Cecil Response Nelson 2 and 3
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Backfire MacMillan 2
Lovelace, Earl A Brief Conversation and 
Other Stories
Persea Books 5
Mais, Roger Listen, the Wind Longman 5
Marshall, Paule Reena and Other Stories Feminist Press 3,4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 46
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
McKenzie, Alecia Satellite City and Other 
Stories
Longman 4 and 5 
McKenzie, Earl Two Roads to Mount Joyful
A Boy Named Ossie
Longman
Heinemann
4 and 5 
2, 3 and 4 
Narinesingh, R & C Insights Nelson 3 
Porritt, Jonathon Once Upon a Planet Puffin 1
Satchwell, Deryck The Alchemy of words: An 
Anthology of Belizean Literature 
for Secondary Schools (2 volumes)
Cubola Productions 1, 2 and 3 
Senior, Olive Summer Lightning
Arrival of the Snake Woman
Longman Caribbean
Longman Caribbean
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Sherlock, Philip M. West Indies Folk Tales Oxford University Press 1
Waters, Erika J. New Writing from the 
Caribbean
MacMillan 5
Young Colville Pataki Full Cubola Productions 3 and 4
Other
Arnott, Kathleen African Myths and Legends Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Ashley, Bernard Puffin Book of School Stories Puffin 1 
Barnes & Egford Twentieth Century Short 
Stories
Nelson 4 and 5 
Barnes, D. R Short Stories of Our time Harrap 4 and 5
Callendar, Timothy It so Happen Heinemann 2
Denny, Neville Pan African Short Stories Evans, Humanities 3
Dhondy, Farrukh East End at Your Feet Nelson 5
Fisk, Nicholas The Puffin Book of Science 
Fiction Stories
Puffin 1 and 2
Forster, E.M. Collected Short Stories Readers Union 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 47
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Goodwyn, Andrew Science Fiction Stories Oxford University Press 4 
Gordimer, Nadine Crimes of Conscience. 
Selected Short Stories
Heinemann 4 and 5 
Gray, J.E.B. Indian Tales and Legends Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Hewett, R. A Choice of Poets Nelson 4 and 5 
Hunter, Jim Modern Short Stories Faber 4 and 5
Ireson, Barabara In a Class of Their Own Puffin 2 and 3
James, Joyce Dubliners Penguin, Wordsworth 
Publishers, Prestwic House
4 and 5
Kerven, Rosalind Earth Magic, Sky Magic Cambridge 3 and 4
Kipling, Rudyard Just So Stories Puffin 1
Lawrence, D.H. Love Among the Haystack and 
Other Stories
Selected Tales
Viking 5
4 and 5 
Lester, Julius Long Journey Home Puffin 4 and 5 
Martinez, Christina The Earth Needs Friends Penguin 1 and 2 
Maugham, W. Somerset The Kite and Other Stories Macmillan 2 
Phinn, Gervase The Turning Tide and Other 
Short Stories
Nelson 2 
Reeves, James Heroes and Monsters: 
Legends of Ancient Greece
Hippocrene Books 1 
Rich, Hilary and Mann, 
Ann
Frankie Mae and Other Stories Nelson 5
Rutherford & Hannah Commonwealth Short Stories Holmes and Meier 5
Smyth, W. M. Good Stories Edward Arnold 3
Taylor, Mildred D. The Friendship and Other 
Stories
Puffin 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 48
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Thomas, Dylan A Prospect of the Sea
Quite Early One Morning 
(Part 1)
Aldine
New direction Publishing
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Walker, Alice Everyday Use and Other 
Stories
Rutgers University Press 4 and 5 
Wambeu, Daniel A Girl for Sale and Other 
Stories
Evans 5 
Welch, John Stories from South Asia Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Woodford, Peggy Misfits Teens 4
SOURCES OF POEMS
West Indian
Bailey, Nahdjla Time for Poetry Nelson 5
Bennett, Paula The Penguin Book of 
Caribbean Verse in English
Penguin 5
Brathwaite, Edward The Arrivants Oxford University Press 5 
Brown, Stewart Caribbean Poetry Now Edward Arnold 5 
Foster, John Spaceways. An Anthology of 
Space Poetry
Oxford University Press 1 
Figueroa, J. F. Caribbean Voices (2 Vols.) Evans 4 
Gasztold, Carmen Bernos Prayers from the Ark Penguin 1, 2 and 3
Gray, Cecil Bite In – Stage 2
Bite In – Stage 3
Bite In 3
Nelson
Nelson
Nelson
2
3 
4 
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Out for Stars 1 MacMillan 1, 2 and 3
Irish, J. A. George There is An Isle Somewhere Caribbean Research 
Centre
5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 49
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Mansfield and Armstrong Every Man Will Shout Oxford University Press 2, 3 and 4 
McKay, Claude Selected Poems Dover 3 
Morris, Mervyn The Pond & Other Poems New Beacon Books 4 and 5 
Mordecai, P. and Walker￾Gordon, G.
Sun Song 1 Longman 2 
Nash, Ogden Custard and Company Viking 1
Nichols, Grace Poetry Jump Up Puffin Books
Phinn, Gervasse Lizard Over Ice Nelson 1, 2 and 3
Pollard, Velma Anansesem Longman 3
Ramchand & Gray West Indian Poetry Longman 3, 4 and 5
Seymour, A. J. Selected Poems Blue Parrot Press 4
Walmsley, Anne The Sun’s Eye Longman Caribbean 2 and 3
Wilson, Donald New Ships Oxford University Press 2 and 3
Other 
Belloc, Hilaire Cautionary Verses for Boys 
and Girls
Puffin 2 and 3 
Benson, Gerard This Poem Doesn’t Rhyme Puffin 2 
Bleiman, Barbara Five Modern Poets Longman 4 and 5 
Collins, V.H. A Book of Narrative Verses Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Forde, A.N. Talk of the Tamarids Hodder Murray 3
Frost, Robert Selected Poems Cliff Road Books 4 and 5
Gasztold, Carmen Bernos Prayers from the Ark Penguin 2 and 3
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Out for Stars MacMillan 2 and 3
Hewett, R. A Choice of Poets Nelson 5
Hughes, Ted Here Today Nelson Thornes Ltd. 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 50
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Magee, Wes The Puffin Book of Christmas 
Poems
Puffin 3 and 4 
Porrit, Johnathan Once Upon a Planet Puffin 2 
Rosen, Michael Culture Shock Puffin 2 
PLAYS
West Indian
Braithwaite, Edward Odale’s Choice Evans 3
Campbell, Alistaire Anansi Nelson 3, 4 and 5
Hill, Errol The Ping Pong2
Plays for Today
MacMillan
Longman
4
3, 4 and 5 
Hillary, Samuel Chippy UWI Extra Mural
Department
3 
James, C. L. R. Beyond a Boundary Random Housing U.K. 5 
Noel, Keith Carlong Caribbean Drama for 
the Classroom
Carlong Publishers 3
Redhead, Wilfred Canaree and Pot1
Hoist Your Flag1
Three Comic Sketches1
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
UWI Extra Mural 
Department 1
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
1
1 
1 
Roach, Eric Belle Fanto
Calabash of Blood
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
4 and 5
5 
Rhone, Trevor Bella’s Gate Boy
Two Can Play and Other Plays
Old Story Time
Macmillan Caribbean
Macmillan Caribbean
Longman
4 and 5
4 and 5
3, 4 and 5 
N.B.: 1Plays for classroom activity and production in the first year. 2The Ping Pong by Errol Hill is available in Carray! A collection of six plays, edited by James Lee Wah, published by MacMillan. Other plays in the collection are: Africa Sling shot by Cicely Waite-Smith; dog and Iguana by Gladys Stuart; Riding Haas by Colville Young; Goose and Gander by Wilfred Redhead and Tears in the Gayelle by Dennis Noel.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 51
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Stone, Judy Champions of the Gayelle MacMillan Caribbean 4 and 5 
Waite-Smith, Cicely Africa Sling-Shot UWI Extra Mural 
Department
2 
Walcott, Derek Malcauchon, or Six in the 
Rain
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
5 
Walcott, Roderick The Harrowing of Benjy UWI Extra Mural 
Department
2 
Other
Anouilh, Jean Antigone (French language 
edition)
French & European Pub. 4 and 5
Bolt, Robert A Man for all Seasons A & C Black 4 and 5
Brecht, Bertolt The Caucasian Chalk Circle
The Life of Galileo
University of Minnesota 
Press
Penguin
5
5 
Chapman, Robert and 
Coxe, Louise
Billy Budd Hill and Wary 4 and 5
Chekhov, Anton The Cherry Orchard Diareads.com 5
Daviot, Gordon Richard of Bordeaux Little Brown 5 
Gheon, Henri Christmas in the Market Place J. Miller Ltd. 2 
Gogol, Nikolai The Government Inspector
The Long and Short and the 
Tall 
Oberon Books 
Heinemann
4 and 5 
5 
Hansberry, Lorraine To Be Young, Gifted and 
Black
A Raisin in the Sun
Vintage, 1st Vintage Books 4 and 5
Vintage 5
Ibsen, Henrik1 Noah
An Enemy of the People
Penguin 5
Modern Library 4 and 5
Jones, Toeckey In Search of Dragon’s 
Mountain
Nelson 4 and 5
N.B.: 1Plays for classroom activity and production in the first year.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 52
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Miller, Arthur2 Death of a Salesman
The Crucible
Penguin
Heinemann, Penguin
5 
4 and 5 
NB: Isben Plays Two published by Methuen, contains both An enemy of the People and A doll’s House as well as Hedda Gabler. 2
Miller Plays published by Methuen, contains the following plays: All My sons, Death of a Salesman, The Crucible and 
A Memory of Two Mondays.
O’Casey, Sean Juno and the Paycock Players Press 4 and 5
Pomerance, Bernard The Elephant Man Grove Press 5 
Priestly, J.B. An Inspector Calls Dsmatists Play Service Inc. 5 
Rattigan, Terrence The Winslow Boy Nick Hern Books 3 
Rose, R. Twelve Angry Men Penguin 4 and 5 
Wood, E. R. The Eight Windmill Book of 
One-Act Plays
Heinemann Educational 
Publishers
2 
Schiach, Don The Wild Bunch and Other 
Plays
Nelson 3, 4, and 5 
Shakespeare, William As You Like It
Hamlet
Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan, Methuen, 
Oxford University Press, 
Penguin
4 and 5 
Julius Caesar Cambridge University 
Press, Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan Oxford 
University Press, Penguin, 
Rout, Stanley Thornes
3, 4 and 5
Macbeth Blackie, Cambridge 
University Press, Circle 
Press Publications, 
Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Hodder, 
Longman, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Oxford 
University Press, Penguin
3, 4 and 5
The Merchant of Venice Cambridge University 
Press, Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Hutchinson, 
3, 4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 53
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Longman, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Oxford 
University Press, Penguin, 
Routledge, Stanley 
Thornes
Richard III Oxford University Press, 
Penguin
4 and 5 
Romeo and Juliet Cambridge University 
Press, Collins E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan
4 and 5
Twelfth Night Cambridge, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Penguin
4 and 5
A Midsummer's Night Dream Oxford World's Clssics 3 and 4
Shaw, George Bernard Pygmalion
Saint Joan
Nu Vision Publication 4 and 5
5 
Sheridan, Richard The Rivals
The School for Scandal
Book Jungle 
Digireads.com 
4 and 5
5 
Swift, Paul No Man’s Land Nelson 4 and 5
Synge, John Riders to the Sea Dodo Press 4 and 5
Thomas, Dylan Under Milk Wood New Directions 
Publishing
4 and 5
Wesker, Arnold Chips with Everything Random House 5
Wilde, Oscar The Importance of Being 
Earnest
Prestwick House Inc. 5
Wilder, Thornton Our Town Harper Perennial Modern 
Classics
4 and 5 
Williams, Tennessee Glass Menagerie
A Streetcar Named Desire
New Directions 
Publishing
New Directions 
Publishing
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 54
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
SOURCES OF IDEAS FOR DRAMA ACTIVITIES
Adland, D. E. Group Drama (Books 1-4) Longman 1 
Allington, A. Drama and Education Blackwell 1 
Chilver, Peter Improvised Drama Batsford 1
Kissoon, Freddie 101 Creative Exercises in 
Drama 
Space Printers 1
Nuttall, Kenneth Let’s Act (Book 1-4) Longman 1
Slade, Peter Child Drama University of London Press 1
Way, Brian Development Through Drama Humanity Books 1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 55
♦ GLOSSARY OF KEY WORDS USED IN THE ENGLISH 
A AND B EXAMINATIONS
WORD TASK
Compare Examine the similarities as well as differences to reach a general 
conclusion. 
For example: Compare the ways in which the two parents in the poems 
“Ana” and “Little Boy Crying” demonstrate their love for the children.
Compare and Contrast Examine the similarities as well as differences to reach a general 
conclusion. 
For example: Compare the ways in which the two parents in “Ana” and 
“Little Boy Crying” demonstrate their love for the children.
It must be noted that the word “compare” used by itself takes into 
consideration both similarities and differences. However, the word 
contrast used by itself indicates that only the differences must be 
provided.
For example: Discuss TWO ways in which Lady Macduff is contrasted 
with Lady Macbeth.
Comment Examine how the writer uses different elements (for example, literary 
device, stage props) to create effect and meaning. The overall effect on 
the piece of work must also be provided. The effect must take into 
account the writers purpose, and other elements of the piece of work, for 
example, theme, structure, diction and tone.
For example: Comment on the shifts of mood in the scene in which 
Lady Macduff appears. 
Describe Provide a detailed account, including significant characteristics or traits of 
the issue in question.
For example: Describe Macbeth’s conflicting thoughts and feelings as he 
contemplates the murder.
Discuss Provide an extended answer exploring related concepts and issues using 
detailed examples but not necessarily drawing a conclusion.
For example: Discuss the importance of Katherina’s final speech in The 
Taming of the Shrew
Explain Focus on what, how and why something occurred. State the reasons or 
justifications, interpretation of results and causes. 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 56
WORD TASK
For example: Explain the dramatic significance of this scene.
Identify Extract the relevant information from the stimulus without explanation. 
For example: Identify TWO phrases in the last four lines that create the 
atmosphere of abandonment.
In English B Paper 02 questions can also ask for an explanation.
For example: Identify and explain TWO ways in which Shakespeare later 
impresses upon his audience what a horrible crime it is to kill a king.
Illustrate Provide examples to demonstrate or prove the subject of the question.
For example: Identify the character traits that can be seen in Amanda 
from the beginning of the play to this point. Illustrate EACH of the 
character traits you have identified.
List Itemise the requested information. Details are not required.
For example: List the main points of the opening speech.
Outline Show or trace the development of something from the point of origin to 
that specified in the question.
For example: Briefly outline what happens in the poems “Richard Cory” 
and “God’s Work”.
State Provide short concise answer without explanation.
For example: State TWO factors which the fitness proponents 
recommend that society should emphasise more.
Summarise Present the main points, ideas or concepts in your own words as far as 
possible.
For example: Summarise the MAJOR factors which contribute to the 
disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market.
Western Zone Office 20 February 2009
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 57
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
EXAMINATION
SPECIMEN
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
FOR
ENGLISH A
READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
Each item in this test has four suggested answers lettered (A), (B), (C), (D). Read each item you are
about to answer and decide which choice is best. On your answer sheet find the number which
corresponds to your item and shade the space having the same letter as the answer you have choosen.
Look at the sample item below.
Sample Item
Choose the word that BEST completes the sentence and shade the appropriate space on the answer
sheet.
All the occupants were _______ from the building before the firemen arrived.
Sample Answer
(A) released
(B) protected A B C D
(C) evacuated
(D) extinguished
The best answer to this item is “evacuated”, so answer space (C) has been shaded.
Copyright © 2008 Caribbean Examinations Council.
All rights reserved.
01218010/SPEC 2009
®
- 2 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 1 - 5
Directions: Each sentence in this section has EITHER one OR two words missing. Choose from
the four suggested answers the word or pair of words which BEST completes the meaning of the
sentence.
1. His dismissal from the job is ______ since
he persists in arriving late.
(A) inevitable
(B) inexcusable
(C) informative
(D) inconceivable
2. The Minister pointed out that ______ building
developments along the river and ______
dumping of refuse into the watercourses
continue to be a problem to his ministry.
(A) illegal ... discriminate
(B) enormous ... poisonous
(C) unauthorised .... judicious
(D) unauthorised ... indiscriminate
3. Clinging to one of her relatives, the bereaved
mother tried to maintain her ______.
(A) grief
(B) status
(C) composure
(D) innocence
4. The investors expected a rate of return which
seemed _______ high in light of current
unfavourable economic conditions.
(A) favourable
(B) adequately
(C) unreasonably
(D) optimistically
5. The psychologist said that it was time that a
course on self respect was made ______ in
all secondary schools.
(A) legal
(B) optimal
(C) universal
(D) mandatory
- 3 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 6 - 10
Directions:
Each sentence in this section has ONE underlined word. Choose from the four suggested answers
the word which is nearly OPPOSITE in meaning to the underlined word.
6. Roger, who had consistently studied for the
whole year, was optimistic about his chances
in the examination.
(A) doubtful
(B) confident
(C) outspoken
(D) unconcerned
7. After the story was published in the
newspaper his colleagues ostracized him.
(A) accepted
(B) discussed
(C) understood
(D) recognised
8. The government’s new health plan was
greeted with enthusiasm.
(A) anxiety
(B) amazement
(C) indifference
(D) disappointment
9. There was a recent newsflash which said that
the state of emergency had been rescinded.
(A) revised
(B) effected
(C) renewed
(D) approved
10. Perhaps he would be more popular if he were
not so reticent.
(A) frank
(B) clever
(C) laughable
(D) talkative
- 4 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 11 - 15
Directions:
Choose from suggested answers A, B, C or D the one that BEST describes EACH of the sentences
11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.
(A) The sentence is too wordy, that is, repetitive or contains redundancies.
(B) The sentence contains clichés or misused metaphors.
(C) The sentence is incorrect grammatically or faulty in diction.
(D) The sentence is acceptable as it stands.
11. The Chernobyl accident gave a grim but
timely reminder to that no nation can hope to
isolate itself from the horrendous effects of
a major nuclear disaster.
12. Is it any wonder why the children that Miss
Brown knows behave like delinquents when
they have a heroine that thinks the worst of
them and their kind?
13. The publishers, flushed with the success of
their most recent anthology of Caribbean
poetry, launched out eagerly into the field of
short stories, hoping to reach even greater
heights.
14. The sighting of Halley’s Comet, a most unique
phenomenon, made 1986 a memorable year
in the annals of the twentieth century.
15. The little boys enjoyed playing in the yard of
the uninhabited house where no one had lived
for many years.
- 5 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 16 - 20
Directions: Some of the following sentences are unacceptable because of inappropriate grammar,
idiom or vocabulary. Some sentences are acceptable as they stand. No sentence contains more than
one inappropriate element.
Choose the one underlined part of the sentence that you feel is inappropriate by selecting the
appropriate letter. If the sentence is acceptable as it stands, choose D.
16. While driving through the ranch on a conducted tour the farmers were appall to see several diseased
 A B C
cattle. No error
 D
17. The soundness of the proposal introduced by the opposition members was quite evident though the
 A B
presentation was both criticised by the President and the Secretary of State. No error
 C D
18. We always feelgood whenever our cricketers playwell enough to win a series of matches convincingly.
 A B C
No error
 D
19. The two robbers, not knowing the value of the loot, were unable to agree on how to divide it among
 A B C
themselves. No error
D
20. One must be aware of threats to your health if happy living is one’s goal. No error
 A B C D
- 6 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 21 – 28
Directions: Read the following poem carefully and then answer items 21 - 28 on the basis of what is
stated or implied.
 Trane
Propped against the crowded bar
he pours into the curved and silver horn
his old unhappy longing for a home
the dancers twist and turn
5 he leans and wishes he could burn
his memories to ashes like some old notorious emperor
of Rome, but no stars blazed across the sky when he was born
no wise men found his hovel, this crowded bar
where dancers twist and turn
10 holds all the fame and recognition he will ever earn
on earth or heaven, he leans against the bar
and pours his old unhappy longing in the saxophone.
Edward Kamau Brathwaite
21. The “silver horn” in line 2 refers to
(A) a wine goblet
(B) an ice bucket
(C) a large vase
(D) a musical instrument
22. Where does the action in lines 1 – 3 take
place?
(A) In a hotel
(B) In a night club
(C) In a music hall
(D) In a living room
23. Lines 2 – 3 is an example of a
(A) personification
(B) simile
(C) hyperbole
(D) metaphor
24. In line 3, “his old unhappy longing for a home”
suggests that the character
(A) did not like music
(B) believed he had little talent
(C) was unhappy because he had no
house
(D) was longing for success and
recognition on a wide scale
- 7 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
25. Line 7 “...but no stars blazed across the sky
when he was born” suggests that
(A) he was born on a dark night
(B) no one was aware of his birth
(C) he was not born to famous parents
(D) his birth lacked great significance
26. The word “hovel” in line 8 refers to
(A) a hotel
(B) a cradle
(C) a poor home
(D) an animal’s pen
27. The poet refers to the birth of Christ in lines
(A) 1 – 2
(B) 5 – 6
(C) 7 – 8
(D) 10 – 11
28. Which of the following words BEST describes
the mood of the character in the poem?
(A) Anger
(B) Nostalgia
(C) Optimism
(D) Melancholy
- 8 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
10
15
20
25
Items 29 - 36
Directions: Read the following passage carefully and then answer items 29 - 36 on the basis of what
is stated or implied.
Nazruddin was an exotic, but he remained bound
to our community because he needed husbands
and wives for his children. I always knew that
in me he saw the prospective husband of one
of his daughters; but I had lived with this knowl￾edge for so long that it didn’t embarrass me. I
liked Nazruddin. I welcomed his visits, his talks,
his very alienness as he sat downstairs in our
drawing room or verandah and spoke of the
excitements of his far-off world.
He was a man of enthusiasms. He relished
everything he did. He liked the houses he bought
(always bargains), the restaurants he chose, the
dishes he had ordered. Everything worked out
well for him, and his tales of unfailing luck would
have made him intolerable if he didn’t have the
gift of describing things so well. He made me
long to do what he had done, to be where he
had been. In some ways he became my model.
He was something of a palmist, in addition to
everything else, and his readings were valued
because he could do them only when the mood
took him. When I was ten or twelve he had
given me a reading and had seen great things in
my hand. So I respected his judgement. He
added to that reading from time to time. I re￾member one occasion especially. He looked at
my palm then said, “You are the most faithful
man I know.” This didn’t please me; it seemed
to me he was offering me no life at all. I said,
“Can you read your own hand? Do you know
what’s in store for you?” He said, “Don’t I
know, don’t I know.”
The tone of his voice was different then, and I
saw that this man, for whom (according to his
talk) everything worked out beautifully, really
lived with a vision of things turning out badly. I
thought: This is how a man should behave; and
I felt close to him after that, closer than I did to
members of my own family.
 5
Then came the crash which some people had
been quietly prophesying for this successful
and talkative man. Nazruddin’s adopted
country became independent, quite suddenly,
and the news from that place for weeks and
months was of wars and killings. From the
way some people talked you might have be￾lieved that if Nazruddin had been another kind
of person, if he had boasted less of his suc￾cess, drunk less wine and been more seemly
in his behaviour, events would have taken an￾other turn. We heard that he had fled with
his family to Uganda. In due course he came
to the coast. People looking for a broken man
were disappointed. Nazruddin was as
sprightly as ever, still with his dark glasses
and suit. The disaster appeared not to have
touched him at all.
30
35
40
29. The reference to Nazruddin as “an exotic”
(line 1) indicates that he is
(A) boring
(B) snobbish
(C) scheming
(D) eccentric
30. “He relished everything he did” (lines 11 - 12)
suggests that Nazruddin
(A) enjoyed all his activities
(B) was an expert on everything
(C) succeeded at whatever he tried
(D) was proud of his accomplishments
45
50
55
- 9 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
31. The writer’s reaction to Nazruddin’s
comment, “You are the most faithful man I
know” (lines 28 - 29), indicates that the writer
(A) did not like faithful men
(B) had himself been unfaithful
(C) thought that faithful men led uninter￾esting lives
(D) felt that faithful men had short
life-spans
32. The answer “Don’t I know, don’t I know”
(lines 32 - 33), indicates to the writer that
Nazruddin
(A) did not really know much about
palmistry
(B) foresaw the possibility of
unfavourable events for himself
(C) was not being truthful about his
experiences
(D) did not know what the future held in
store for him
33. According to the extract which of the
following factors caused some people to
prophesy ill luck for Nazruddin?
 I. He was too boastful.
 II. He drank too much.
III. His behaviour was unacceptable.
(A) I and II only
(B) I and III only
(C) II and III only
(D) I, II and III
34. According to the extract, ONE of the reasons
the writer liked Nazruddin was that he
(A) inspired the writer to pattern himself
after him
(B) was a respected palmist in the com￾munity in which he lived
(C) considered the writer a prospective
husband for one of his daughters
(D) described interestingly to the writer
the secrets of his worldly successes
35. According to the extract, Nazruddin left the
country in which he was living because
(A) the new leaders were dissatisfied
with his behaviour and drove him
out
(B) his business there suffered financial
ruin
(C) there was violence in the country
(D) he could no longer find suitable
husbands and wives there for his
children
36. The impression given of Nazruddin in the
extract is that he
(A) was a coward
(B) was not easily daunted
(C) genuinely loved his family
(D) did not care about the community
- 10 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 37- 44
Directions: Read the following extract carefully and then answer items 37 - 44 on the basis of what
is stated or implied.
5
10
15
20
25
Every November the roads to Pushkar, a sleepy little town in western India, become clogged with
buses, bullock carts and camels bringing people to the Pushkar camel fair. Hundreds of camel herders
along with the thousands who are already there camped outside on the reddish rust sand dunes from afar
look like the mounds of paprika in a spice shop. Here, for two weeks before the full moon, camels are
bought, bartered and sold.
The Raikas, independent and hospitable people, are descended from a tribe that migrated to Asia
from Germany centuries ago. According to their mythology, however, Siva, a god of the Hindu trinity,
created the first camel. Siva had four daughters, and each married a Rajput (or King) of the highest caste.
Their children became camel herders, grew tall, thin yet strong, with high cheekbones and oval faces.
These mythic forebears of the Raikas could live for days solely on camel milk.
The Raikas are known by many names: raberai, or “guide”, by those who respect them; and bhool,
or “ghost”, by others, perhaps jealous of their freedom. It is easy to understand how the Raikas got this
last name, as they can appear suddenly and mysteriously on the horizon with a single camel, or even a
magnificent herd of a hundred. The focal point of the Raika culture is the camel; it is reflected in their
language, their religion and their mobility. They have 400 synonyms for camel, and refer to their favourite
camels with affectionate names like “Raieao”, which means brown. Herders grow up learning 15 calls to
their camels.
The Raika man wears simple attire: a white tunic top and dhoti, a cloth wrapped around his waist
and pulled up between his legs, Gandhi-style. He may toss a worn blanket elegantly over one shoulder,
creating style with simple dignity and poise. The Raikas’ world of brown sands and brown camels is
gloriously brightened with garments the shades of amber, rose and orange. Every morning, young men
deftly wrap scarlet turbans, 3 yards long and a yard wide, around their heads for protection against the
desert’s day-time heat and bitter night-time cold. At sundown, the sun’s sinking light seems to make the
turbans glow. Night or day, the business at hand is camels. Everything else - the dentist with his suitcase
of instruments and false teeth, the barber ready to give a quick shave on the sands, the bhopa or musician
playing ballads about the camel god Pabu, the stalls with sweets - is a distraction. Here the visitor can
learn anything and everything about camels.
37. The writer mentions the congestion on the
roads to Pushkar in order to
(A) show the popularity of the camel fair
(B) comment on the poor state of the
roads
(C) prove that Pushkar is not a sleepy
town
(D) suggest that traffic jams can be
found everywhere
38. According to the passage, how long does the
camel fair last?
(A) Ten days
(B) Two weeks
(C) Until the full moon
(D) Until all the camels are sold
- 11 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
39. Which of the following does mythology as￾cribe to the Raikas?
(A) They can exist solely on camel’s milk.
(B) They migrated to Germany centuries
ago.
(C) They are the descendants of a Hindu
god.
(D) They became camel herders at the
suggestion of Parvati.
40. The word “hospitable” (line 6) is CLOSEST
in meaning to
(A) proud
(B) happy
(C) ancient
(D) friendly
41. The writer suggests that “bhool” could be an
appropriate name for the Raikas because
(A) many Raikas are jealous of their free-
 dom
(B) they belong to a tribe that is practi-
 cally extinct
(C) they can surprise people by their sud-
 den appearance
(D) many people are afraid of them
42. The writer mentions that the Raikas have “400
synonyms for camel” (line 15) and that
herders “grow up learning 15 calls to their
camels” (lines 16 - 17) to show
(A) their superiority in comparison to
their herders
(B) that the Raikas know everything
about camels
(C) that the Raikas are careless about
names
(D) how important the camels are to the
Raikas
43. As a means of protection against desert tem￾peratures, the Raikas
(A) wrap long turbans around their heads
(B) wear white tunic tops and dhotis
(C) brighten their garments with coloured
 materials
(D) are never without blankets around
 their shoulders
44. In the extract, which of the following is NOT
stated about the Raikas?
(A) They are friendly.
(B) They dress simply.
(C) They are respectful.
(D) They enjoy freedom.
- 12 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 45 - 52
Directions: Read the following advertisement carefully and then answer items 45 - 52 on the basis
of what is stated or implied.
GIVE YOUR CHILD THE CHILDREN’S ASPIRIN MORE DOCTORS
RECOMMEND THAN ANY OTHER. It tastes better. Its pure, natural (not artificial)
orange flavour and creamy smoothness make it more pleasant for children.
It’s the highest quality. Scientifically tested ingredients and 224 quality-control
checks ensure maximum reliability.
In a national survey it was picked 4 to 1 by children’s doctors who recommended
an individual brand. Of course, little boys and girls prefer the genuine orange flavour of
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
But even more important to you, as a mother, is the reliable purity of this
aspirin itself. It takes 224 careful product-control checks to ensure the highest quality. But it’s
worth it. Because that’s what makes
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
the preferred way to relieve the big fevers, little aches, the distress children suffer when
they come down with colds. Doctorsknow about the highest quality of this aspirin. That’s why,
in a survey covering practically all of the children’s doctors in the nation,
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
was specified 4 to 1 among those who recommended a brand.
But one thing the majority of children’s doctors do not favour is the addition of
other ingredients (such as bufferin) to children’s aspirin. So always give your children pure
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN. 5
10
15
20
45. One of the claims made by the passage is
that St. Michael aspirin
(A) is the only children’s aspirin
(B) works faster than other brands
(C) tastes better than other aspirins
(D) is used by mothers all over the world
46. From the passage it can be inferred that
doctors recommend St. Michael aspirin
because
(A) children like it
(B) it is easy to obtain
(C) its quality is excellent
(D) it is the cheapest brand
- 13 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
47. The passage is directed specifically to
(A) children
(B) mothers
(C) doctors
(D) druggists
48. The words ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR
CHILDREN (line 8) are printed in block
capitals to
(A) give a neat appearance
(B) introduce a new product
(C) capture the attention of the reader
(D) prove reliability through quality
control
49. The author mentions the number of quality
checks on St. Michael aspirin to tell the reader
that
(A) it relieves all children’s diseases
(B) no artificial ingredients are added
(C) it has been recommended by many
doctors
(D) the product is safe and superior to
others
50. Which of the following was a result of the
survey mentioned in line 6?
(A) It was decided not to add bufferin to
children’s aspirin.
(B) It was decided that aspirin should be
flavoured with orange.
(C) The most popular brand of children’s
aspirin among doctors was St.
Michael.
(D) Mothers were assured of the purity
of the product.
51. Which of the following types of writing does
the writer employ in this advertisement?
(A) Expository
(B) Narrative
(C) Descriptive
(D) Persuasive
52. The MOST suitable title for this advertisement
is
(A) ASPIRIN: The Children’s Friend
(B) ASPIRIN: The Cure for All
(C) DRUGS For Children
(D) Mother’s Help!
- 14 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 53 – 60
Directions: Read the following extract carefully and then answer items 53 - 60 on the basis of what is
stated or implied.
53. The slogan “Welcome to The Foothills”
suggests that the advertisement is directed
to
(A) persons from the lower income
group
(B) all visitors to the property
(C) only persons seeking to own property
at “The Foothills”
(D) middle and upper income groups
54. Which of the following BEST describes “The
Foothills”?
(A) A vacation home
(B) An all inclusive facility
(C) A gated housing development
(D) A retirement housing development
Caribbean Beat, Media and Editorial Projects Ltd.,
July 2006, p.12.
55. The size of the lots shown on the
advertisement range from
(A) 1,000 to 9,000 square feet
(B) 6,000 to 8,000 square feet
(C) 7,000 to 8,000 square feet
(D) 6,000 to 9,000 square feet
56. What information is given to help persons find
out more about “The Foothills”?
(A) E-mail address only
(B) E-mail address and telephone number
(C) E-mail address, fax number and
website
(D) E-mail, website and telephone
numbers
57. If Mr Glen Selman purchased lot number 2,
he will be CLOSEST to which of the
following sporting facilities?
(A) Pool hall
(B) Golf course
(C) Jogging track
(D) Swimming pool
58. Which of the following BEST explains the
presence of the security booths on the
property?
(A) There is much crime in the area.
(B) Access to the property is restricted.
(C) The owners want to keep visitors out.
(D) The property owners require
protection.
59. The information given in “conveniently located
seven minutes from Trincity mall and easy
access to the airport, golf course and schools”
suggests that the property is
(A) close to everything
(B) located seven minutes away from
everything
(C) the most important place in the
community
(D) ideally located in relation to
significant places
60. Which of the following can be included to
make “The Foothills” even more attractive
to potential buyers?
(A) A taxi service
(B) A supermarket
(C) Banking services
(D) A secondary school
- 15 -
01218010/SPEC 2009
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS TEST.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
EXAMINATION 
ENGLISH A 
SPECIMEN PAPER 
Paper 02 – General Proficiency 
2 hours 40 minutes
READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
1. Section A consists of ONE question. You MUST answer this question.
2. Section B consists of TWO questions. You MUST answer both questions from 
this section.
3. Section C consists of THREE questions. You MUST answer ONE question 
from this section.
4. Section D consists of TWO questions. You MUST answer ONE question from 
this section.
5. You are advised to take some time to read through the paper and plan your 
answers.
DO NOT TURN THIS PAGE UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO.
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council.
All rights reserved.
01218020/SPEC 2012
FORM 01218020/SPEC 2012
 TEST CODE 01218020
- 2 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION A 
(Suggested time: 35 minutes)
Answer Question 1.
1. Read the following newspaper article on brain health carefully and then write a 
summary of it in NOT MORE THAN 120 words. If this limit is exceeded, only 
the first 120 words of your answer will be read and assessed. As far as possible, 
use your OWN words. Your summary must be in continuous prose.
You may use the answer booklet to jot down a plan of your points or make notes. 
THIS WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on how well you
(a) were able to identify the main ideas and opinions in the extract
(b) organized and expressed these ideas
(c) used appropriate grammar, sentence structure, vocabulary, spelling and 
punctuation. 
 
 
People generally take the brain and its functions for granted, especially in the 
first forty years of life. Even though the brain is considered to be one of the most 
important organs in the human body, we don’t pay much attention to keeping it fit and 
healthy. This is an understandable situation since life usually forces us to be active on 
many levels in our younger years, but we need to pay more careful attention to brain 
health, especially in light of the demands of modern life. Generally, when people think 
about staying fit, they only focus from the neck down. However, the health of your 
body should also include your brain. A healthy brain plays a critical role in almost 
everything you do: thinking, feeling, remembering, working, playing, and even 
sleeping. Improving your brain health can protect you from dementia, increase your 
memory and sharpen your concentration.
There is much that can be done to keep the brain healthy at any age. Lists 
widely offered include simple, and even funny things, like brushing your teeth with the 
unfamiliar hand, or showering in the dark, walking and gardening, all of which are low, 
or free of cost. Recommended routines include physical activity, which increases the 
flow of blood to the brain; maintaining social contacts and having intelligent 
conversations; sleeping well. On the other hand there is a list of things to avoid. 
Examples from that list include that you should be careful not to drink to excess, you 
should not ignore any changes in your physical or mental health, try not to be isolated 
in your home, and certainly do not entertain the idea that you are too old to take up 
something new. The most outstanding of all the recommendations is physical activity.
Physical activity is one of the best ways to promote the growth of new brain 
cells and keep the brain healthy. Exercise increases levels of brain chemicals that 
encourage the growth of nerve cells and this explains to some extent why aerobic 
activity enhances memory skills, and why moderately strenuous activity is strongly 
associated with successful brain aging. An interesting form of physical activity is 
- 3 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
dance. Learning a dance can nourish brain cells, which translates to cognitive skills in 
the real world, and dancing requires twists and turns that strengthen the brain 
connections.
There is always the caution attached, that you use common sense when 
increasing physical activity. Extra care is necessary when you have not exercised for a 
long time, and it is very important to consult with your doctor or health care provider 
before starting an exercise programme or increasing your activity.
“Keeping Your Brain Healthy” The Barbados Advocate, 
October 4, 2009, p. 26.
Total 30 marks
- 4 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION B
(Suggested time: 40 minutes)
Answer Questions 2 and 3.
2. Read the passage below carefully and then answer all the questions that follow.
 “My turn now,” said Bobby, and the others ran to hide as he started to count. 
Celia was hunting for a good hiding-place among the trees near to the fence when she 
heard a low hiss. She looked keenly, but though her eyes were used to the darkness, 
she could see no one. The hiss came again – surely from very near? 
 Celia turned this way and that, trying to see with her whole body, to pierce the 
darkness. As the sound came again, she rushed straight towards it and then gasped in 
surprise as she felt flesh against her face and outstretched hands.
 Then she realized what the scamps had been doing. Dingo and Jiggs had taken 
off their shirts. In the moonless dark of the night, their brown skins would make 
them invisible. Their pants, being a dull khaki, were quite safe from detection. She 
wanted to laugh out, but Bobby would be sure to hear. In fact he was already coming 
in their direction. Celia was hastily pushed behind Jiggs and cautioned to stay 
absolutely still. As Bobby approached, it gave her a strange feeling to know that he 
was looking straight at them and could not see them. She felt as though she really 
was invisible, as if she needed his seeing to make her really exist. She felt light, 
insubstantial, a ghost. Bobby came to within a few feet of them, then wandered off, 
still searching earnestly.
And so time passed – days of schoolwork and afternoons of play. Mrs. Wilson 
had great trouble trying to get the children to settle down to serious homework during 
the evenings. Dingo and Jiggs hated any form of regimentation and could not see 
why they should do more work at home than they did at school. This of course made 
Celia reluctant to do her work too. One day matters came to a head.
Adapted from Joy Moore, “The Cousins” Backfire: 
A Collection of Caribbean Short Stories, 
Macmillan Education, 1973, p. 99.
 (a) What game were the children playing? (1 mark )
 (b) Why did the boys remove their shirts while playing? (2 marks)
 (c) What did the boys do (lines 8 - 17) to make Celia call them “scamps”?
 (2 marks)
 (d) Identify TWO phrases, one in paragraph 1 and one in paragraph 3 which 
indicate that the children took the game seriously. (2 marks)
 (e) Quote the evidence from paragraph 3 that suggests that Celia was 
uncomfortable with not being seen. (2 marks)
(f) Which phrase in paragraph 3 indicates that Celia felt relief? (2 marks)
5
10
15
20
- 5 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
 (g) According to paragraph 4, what is the conflict between Mrs. Wilson and the 
children? (1 mark )
 (h) What metaphorical expression in paragraph 4 indicates that the conflict was 
eventually brought into the open? (1 mark )
(i) What does the writer use the word “regimentation” (line 20) to suggest? 
 (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
- 6 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
3. Read the passage below carefully and then answer all the questions that follow.
 Food on the whole offers an incomparable sensory experience. But with baked 
foods - desserts, pastries, pies, cakes - this experience is perfected. All the senses are 
delighted, and the pleasure is somehow heightened by the small portions of these treats 
we consume, relative to other meal components.
First of all they smell like heaven. For many of us, long before we even begin 
to appreciate the other fine things, the power of baked goods holds sway, largely due to 
the aroma that wafts out of the neighbourhood bakeries. It is a smell rich with promise. 
With baked goods you know that the source of that gorgeous scent is quite likely 
something edible. Good bread has a smell that makes you feel like you have walked 
into a warm room off a cold street.
Cakes are a different matter entirely. With the exception of plain, wholesome 
sponge cakes, instead of comforting, the scent of some cakes can be quite maddening. 
Soaked in essence of spices, the scent bursts from them as from ripe fruits. 
Then there’s sound. If you are not in the habit of listening to your cakes as they 
emerge from the oven, I don’t know that there is much point in trying to explain the 
language of baked goods. Something between a sizzle and a bubble, it is a deeply 
satisfying sound that says “I am here. I am ready. I will not disappoint?” But better 
than the sounds of the finished product are those of the preparation stage. Can I really 
be the only person who tries to emulate in her own kitchen the sounds made on 
cooking shows? In the staging of a TV show, batters sound thicker and creamier; the 
wooden spoon against the ceramic bowl so strong and confident; sugar and butter being 
creamed is an exquisite torture.
Adapted from “Not Bread Alone”,
Caribbean Beat No. 67, May-June 2004, p. 63.
 (a) According to the writer, what is the first thing people enjoy about baked foods? 
(1 mark )
 (b) What particular kinds of baked food are described in the passage? (2 marks)
 (c) Identify the expression in paragraph 2 which suggests that most people cannot 
resist the smell of baked foods. (2 marks)
 (d) Identify TWO phrases which suggest the pleasant effect from the smell of 
baked foods. (2 marks)
 (e) To what senses does the writer appeal in paragraphs 2 and 4? (2 marks)
(f) Why does the writer find the sound made by baked food as it is taken from the 
oven to be satisfying? (2 marks)
 (g) What TWO sounds are compared in the final paragraph? (2 marks)
(h) Why does the writer use “exquisite” to describe torture (line 22)? (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
5
10
15
20
- 7 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION C 
(Suggested time: 45 minutes)
Answer ONE question in this section.
Your answer in this section should be approximately 400 to 450 words in length.
You MUST write in Standard English. However, dialect may be used in conversation. 
You may use the answer booklet to jot down a plan of your points or make notes. THIS 
WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on how well you:
(a) used the stimulus provided
(b) developed and organized the content of your writing
(c) used language appropriate to your audience, purpose and content
(d) used appropriate grammar, sentence structure, paragraphs, vocabulary, spelling 
and punctuation.
EITHER
SHORT STORY (Questions 4 and 5)
4. Write a story based on the picture below.
Source: Caribbean Beat, November - December 2006, p. 63.
(35 marks)
- 8 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
OR
5. A cold hand grasped his wrist as he slumped to his knees.
Write a story which includes this sentence. (35 marks)
OR
DESCRIPTION (Question 6) 
6. The streets were filled with pedestrians in anticipation of their new leader.
Describe the mood of the pedestrians and the atmosphere in the streets. (35 marks)
SECTION D
(Suggested time: 30 minutes)
Answer ONE question in this section.
Your answer in this section should be approximately 250 to 300 words in length.
You MUST write in Standard English. You may use the answer booklet to jot down a 
plan of your points or make notes. THIS WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on the
(a) clarity, organization and development of your argument
(b) appropriateness of style for the intended audience
(c) correctness of grammar, sentences, paragraphs, vocabulary, spelling and 
punctuation.
EITHER
7. The government should ban the importation of all fruits and vegetables in support of 
local production.
Write an essay giving your views on this statement. (35 marks)
- 9 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
OR
8. “Hungry students cannot learn. Free lunch should be provided for all secondary school 
students.”
Write an argument EITHER supporting OR opposing this view. (35 marks)
END OF TEST
The Council has made every effort to trace copyright holders. However, if any have 
been inadvertently overlooked, or any material has been incorrectly acknowledged, 
CXC will be pleased to correct this at the earliest opportunity. 
01218020/SPEC 2012
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
EXAMINATION
ENGLISH A
SPECIMEN PAPER 2009
Item No. Key Syllabus
Reference
1 A U.A.
2 D U.A.
3 C U.A.
4 C U.A.
5 A U.A.
6 D U.A.
7 A U.A.
8 C U.A.
9 C U.A.
10 D U.A.
11 D U.A.
12 C U.A.
13 B U.A.
14 A U.A.
15 A U.A.
16 C U.A.
17 C U.A.
18 D U.A.
19 C U.A.
20 B U.A.
21 D U.C.
22 B U.C.
23 D U.C.
24 C U.C.
25 D U.C.
26 C U.C.
27 C U.C.
28 A U.C.
29 D U.C.
30 A U.C.
Item No. Key Syllabus
Reference
31 C U.C.
32 B U.C.
33 A U.C.
34 A U.C.
35 C U.C.
36 B U.C.
37 A U.B.
38 B U.B.
39 C U.B.
40 D U.B.
41 C U.B.
42 D U.B.
43 A U.B.
44 C U.B.
45 C U.D.
46 C U.D.
47 B U.D.
48 C U.C.
49 D U.D.
50 C U.D.
51 D U.D.
52 A U.D.
53 B U.B.
54 C I.B.
55 D U.B.
56 D U.B.
57 C U.B.
58 B U.B.
59 D U.B.
60 B U.B.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH A 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 2 -
Question 1
P1 UNDERSTANDING PROFILE: Maximum - 10 marks Content - 10
 
P2 EXPRESSION PROFILE: Maximum - 20 marks Organisation – 10
 Mechanics - 10 
Marks are to be awarded on the basis of information within the first 120 
words.
Marks will be awarded as follows:
(1) Content - 10 marks
(2) Organisation of Content - 10 marks
(3) Language Usage - 10 marks
(1) CONTENT
The answer will be judged for its adequacy with respect to the 
following criteria within the set word limit:
- accuracy of details (and their original linkages); and 
completeness
- clarity and faithfulness in respect of purpose/intent; and 
appropriateness of message and tone
- attention to perspective/point of view and consistency of focus
(2) ORGANISATION OF CONTENT
- arrangement presented through sequencing, concept of paragraph, 
selection of cohesive ties, achievement of economy.
- selection and arrangement of information resulting in coherent 
structure and sense of audience 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 3 -
Question 1 cont’d
(3) LANGUAGE USAGE
The following will be considered in awarding the grades:
(i) Correct use of structure and language:
- Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses chosen 
must be of the appropriate type)
- Sentences must be clear and meaningful 
- There must be effective and appropriate transition between 
sentences
 
- Subjects and verbs must agree
- Pronouns must agree with their antecedents
- There must be consistency in the use of tense
(ii) Accuracy of mechanics
Correct spelling and punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full 
stops, commas, question marks, etc.)
Marks will be awarded on the following scale:
N.B. 
 1. Students who have performed incompetently in the (1) and 
(2) will be limited to 3 marks in Mechanics of Writing
2. Answers which make consistent use of the words of the 
stimulus text will not be awarded more than 3 marks for 
Mechanics of Writing.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 4 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 1.
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates:
(i)&(ii) Superiority in addressing the criteria
(iii) Excellent, efficient and error-free 
use of language (as indicated under 
points 1 and 2 in Mechanics of 
Writing)
10 10 10
5. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Superiority in addressing the criteria
(iii) Very good use of language though 
there may be the occasional lapse in 
accuracy.
9 9 9 
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i)&(ii) Competence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Effective and accurate use of 
language though there may be a few 
lapses.
7-8 7-8 7-8 
3. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Competence in addressing the criteria
(iii) Some ability to use language 
accurately and effectively but with 
some inconsistency in accurate 
usage.
5-6 5-6 5-6 
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Incompetence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Inability to use language accurately.
OR: Insufficient information presented in 
some area.
4 4 4 
1. Demonstrates: 
(i)&(ii) Incompetence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language. 
OR: Too little information presented to 
make an assessment.
0-3 0-3 0-3 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 5 -
Question 1. cont’d
Sample Summary
The Caribbean is famous for its sporting talents. Although we welcome the 
emphasis on training in some countries, little attention is paid to 
nutrition in the Caribbean. 
Basic dietary provisions should be observed before, during and after 
competitions. The combination of training and nutrition ensures the best 
results without resorting to performance enhancing drugs. The value of 
nutrition can be seen especially where athletes may be attracted to fast 
foods, as well as fads and diets lacking essential nutrients.
The use of illegal drugs is increasing because of the rich rewards of 
winning. We must remember that drugs can harm our health even when we 
retire and we must ensure that our champions are drug-free and worthy role 
models.
 119 words 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 6 -
Question 2
(a) Her air of vulnerability. (2 marks)
(b) It was a hard task for him to live up to the image of being a doctor 
/ to fulfil (live up) to her expectations. (2 marks)
(c) Because she wanted him to become a doctor / dreamed of him becoming a 
doctor. (2 marks)
(d) Because he knew she was willing to sacrifice herself for him.
(2 marks)
(e) Mother and son. (1 marks)
(f) His father worked long hours / that he left early for work and came 
home late at night. (2 marks)
(g) A negative assessment. OR The father was considered to have been a 
failure despite the fact that he had worked hard. OR The son did not 
consider the father to have achieved much. (2 marks)
(h) There was zinc and broken fences / zinc and poverty. Gold lane 
connotes prosperity / riches but in fact it was poverty-stricken with 
zinc for fences. (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 7 -
SECTION 2
Question 3 
(a) negative (2 marks)
(b) never / none / (rhetorical question) (1 mark)
(c) move, swaying to / hooked (2 marks)
(d) there is too much of it / unimaginative (2 marks)
(e) Carnival (2 marks)
(f) Sand (2 marks)
(g) repetition of words beginning with “s” / alliteration (2 marks)
(h) July (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 8 -
Questions 4 and 5 – (Short Story) 35 marks
EXPRESSION C: 35 marks
The following criteria will be used to assess the composition:
(a) Content and relevance of story: 
(i) Story Line/Plot - Action Structure
 - The story line must be clearly developed (e.g. the events 
in the story must be linked appropriately.)
 - Links must be maintained appropriate to the choice of 
technique.
 - Conflict(s) must be satisfactorily resolved.
 - Action must be satisfactorily concluded.
 - Actions/events must be clearly motivated (e.g. there must 
be some plausible reason(s) for the things that happen).
 - Setting must be established (e.g. there must be a clear 
indication of where and when the action takes place).
(ii) Characterisation: 
 - Characters must be believable (e.g. characters must act 
and use language that is consistent with who they are).
 - Any change in character (e.g. personality/behaviour) must 
be clearly established.
 - Characters must be sufficiently developed.
 - Dialogue, when used, should be functional (e.g. may 
develop character, action and atmosphere).
(b) Organisation: 
 - Details/events must be logically and effectively sequenced.
(c) (i) Effective use of language: 
 - Appropriate choice of words to create characters, 
atmosphere and setting.
 - Economic and lively use of language to create story 
elements listed under (a) and (b).
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 9 -
Questions 4 and 5 - (Short Story) 35 marks cont’d 
(ii) Correct use of structures of the language: 
 - Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses 
chosen must be of the appropriate type).
 - Sentences must be clear.
 - Sentences must be meaningful.
 - There must be effective and appropriate transitions 
between sentences and paragraphs.
 - Subjects and verbs must agree.
 - Pronouns must agree with their antecedents.
 - There must be consistency in the use of tense.
(iii) Accuracy of mechanics: 
 - Correct spelling, punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full 
stops, question marks).
 - Paragraphing.
N.B.: If the student’s response satisfies no criteria in (a) page 8, 
the response must be given zero marks.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 10 -
Question 6 (Description) 35 marks
EXPRESSION C: 35 marks
Descriptive Answer
The following criteria will be used to assess the composition: 
(a) Structural Coherence of Description
(i) Description must be clearly constructed and developed 
(e.g. the different components must be linked 
appropriately).
(ii) The different focuses and facets must be linked 
appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus 
vs. peripheral detail). 
(iii) The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer 
must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements.
(iv) Choice of features to be described must be clearly 
motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture.
(b) Relation between object, state of mind, event, etc. being 
described and the language used.
(i) Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent 
within itself.
(ii) Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.) 
must be clearly established.
(iii) If characters are being described, they must be 
sufficiently developed.
(iv) Dialogue, when used, should be functional (e.g. to develop 
character, atmosphere, mood, etc.)
(c) Organisation:- 
(i) Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. 
(d) Effective use of language
(i) Varied and lively use of language to create picture 
elements. 
(ii) Appropriate choice of words to create characters, moods, 
tones, atmosphere and setting. 
 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 11 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 4&5: 
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(i) Excellent manipulation of features of action 
structure and characterization. 
(ii) Excellent organisation.
(iii) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language. 
35-33
5. Suggests: 
(i) Very good manipulation of features of action 
structure characterization.
(ii) Very good organisation.
(iii) Very good use of language though there may be 
the occasional lapse in accuracy.
29-32
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good manipulation of features of action 
structure but with some unevenness in the 
presentation of these features.
(ii) Good organisation.
(iii) Effective and accurate use of language, though 
there may be a few lapses.
18-28
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the manipulation of features 
of action structure.
(ii) Some ability to organise events/ details.
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some slight inconsistency 
in accurate usage.
11-17
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manipulate vital features of 
action structure.
(ii) An inability to organise events and details in 
a logical manner.
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language.
OR: Insufficient information presented in some 
areas.
6-10
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manipulate features of 
action structure.
(ii) Total inability to organise events and details.
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-5 
Note: A response that is too short (less than one page, 200 words) should 
not be given a mark higher than 17/3.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 12 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 6. 
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(iv) Excellent manipulation of descriptive details 
(v) Excellent organisation.
(vi) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language. 35-33
5. Suggests: 
(iv) Very good manipulation of features 
descriptive details 
(v) Very good organisation.
(vi) Very good use of language though there may 
be the occasional lapse in accuracy.
29-32
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good manipulation of descriptive details
(ii) Good organisation.
(iii) Effective and accurate use of language, 
though there may be a few lapses.
18-28
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the manipulation of 
descriptive details.
(ii) Some ability to organise events/ details.
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some slight 
inconsistency in accurate usage.
11-17
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manipulate vital descriptive 
details.
(ii) An inability to organise events and details 
in a logical manner.
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language.
OR: Insufficient information presented in some 
area.
6-10
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manipulate descriptive 
details.
(ii) Total inability to organise events and 
details.
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-5 
Note: A response that is too short (less than one page, 200 words) should 
not be given a mark higher than 17/3.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 13 -
Questions 7-8 (Alternatives) 35 marks 
EXPRESSION D: 35 marks
Marks will be awarded for the following:
Area I:
1. Content - Argument and Comment
(a) The selection of information/details must be relevant to the 
focus of the argument.
(b) The argument must show a clear sense of the writer’s awareness 
of audience (for example, the writer may take the position that 
the audience : (i) knows nothing about the topic or (ii) shares 
basic information about the topic).
(c) The writer must use register and tone appropriate to the 
audience selected.
(d) The writer’s purpose must be clearly linked to audience needs 
(indicated in (b) (i) and (ii), for example, (i) to inform, 
persuade and convince of a point of view (ii) to 
persuade/convince)
(e) The supporting details that are used to develop the argument 
must fulfil one or more of the following functions: (i) expand, 
(ii) explain, (iii) illustrate (e.g. by means of anecdotes, etc) 
the main argument(s).
(f) In illustrating, explaining or expanding the argument, the 
writer must make use of a range of strategies, for example, 
defining, showing causes and effects, making meaningful 
comparisons.
(g) The writer must argue from a consistent point of view, this 
means the writer may anticipate the opposition’s arguments but 
must not contradict his/her own argument(s)/position. 
2. Organisation: - Logical development and reasoning
(a) The writer must present the details in a logical sequence that 
maintains the focus of the argument.
(b) The logical sequence of ideas/details must be clear within 
sentences, across sentences in paragraphs and between 
paragraphs.
(c) The conclusions the writer draws must arise naturally and 
logically from the arguments presented.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 14 -
Questions 7-8 (Alternatives) 35 marks cont’d
Area II
Expression (A) skills ( marks)
1. Correct use of structures of the language:
 - Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses chosen must 
be of the appropriate type). 
 - Sentences must be clear.
 - Sentences must be meaningful.
 - There must be effective and appropriate transitions between 
sentences and between paragraphs.
 - Subjects and verbs must agree.
 - Pronouns must agree with their antecedents.
 - There must be consistency in the use of tense.
2. Accuracy of mechanics: 
 - Correct spelling, punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full stops, 
question marks)
 - Paragraphing
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 15 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 4&5 : 
Area
I
Area 
II
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(i) Excellent management of argument and content 
as indicated under Area I. (a) - (g). 
(ii) Excellent organisation of arguments and 
details as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(c). 
(iii) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language as indicated under Area II.
24-23 11-10
5. Suggests: 
(i) Very good management of argument and 
content as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(g). 
(ii) Very good organisation of arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Very good use of language though there may 
be the occasional lapse in accuracy.
22-20 9-8 
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good management of argument and content as 
indicated under Area I. (a) - (g). 
(ii) Good organisation of arguments and details. 
(iii) Good use of language, though there may be a 
few lapses.
19-12 7-6 
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the management of argument 
and content as indicated under Area I. (a) 
- (g). 
(ii) Some ability to organise arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some inconsistency in 
accurate usage.
11-8 5-3 
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manage vital features of 
argument as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(g). 
(ii) An inability to organise arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language. 
OR: Insufficient information presented. 
7-5 2 
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manage features of 
argument. 
(ii) Total inability to organise arguments. 
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-4 0-1 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
JANUARY 2004
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examination in January 2004 followed the format used in previous years. Paper
01, the multiple choice paper, tested the Understanding profile of the syllabus, and
Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the Expression component of the syllabus
as well as the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
When performance in 2004 is compared with performance in 2003, an increase in the
percentage of candidates achieving Grade III and above is evident. In 2003, 36 per
cent of the candidates achieved Grade I to III, while in 2004, 54 per cent achieved
Grade III or higher.
The overall mean in 2003 was 52.5 whereas in January 2004 it was 57.90. The overall
improvement is attributable to improvement in Paper 01 and in all areas of Paper 02.
Performance in the Comprehension section of Paper 02 showed the most dramatic
change, and the overall quality of the responses in this section was impressive.
The improvement in performance this year, expecially, in comprehension, is wel￾come. Hopefully, this level of performance can be maintained.
DETAILED COMMENTS
GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Section One
Question 1 (Expression)
This question tested candidates’ ability to summarise information given in an adver￾tisement. Generally, candidates seemed to understand what was required of them,
although far too many exceeded the maximum length specified in the instructions.
Candidates should be made aware that the part of their answer that goes beyond the
specified maximum length will NOT be marked by the Examiners.
- 3 -
 The text this year contained several technical terms. Candidates were required to re￾use a number of words from the test, rather than their own language, as is generally
required of this answer. It was, however, still necessary for candidates to take all the
itemised technical information and put it into prose, that is, in the form of well con￾structed, grammatically and semantically logical sentences.
Generally, candidates were able to identify the main points of the advertisement.
There was still, however, the need to be selective and for candidates to be aware that
all the pieces of information were not of equal value and significance in capturing the
basic meaning of the text.
Teachers should remember that summarising is a specialised skill which requires
special attention and emphasis, and should provide their students with abundant prac￾tice, on a variety of textual stimulus material.
Section Two
There was a general improvement when compared with January 2003, although a
number of candidates failed to score any marks on each question in this section.
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage from
a work of fiction written in Standard English. Candidates were required to show an
appreciation of the writer’s craft, the impressions which the work creates, and rela￾tionships between characters, rather than simply an understanding of the overtly stated
facts. Some candidates were unable to deduce what the setting of the text was (it was
the waiting room of an Embassy), and this affected their responses to some of the
parts of this question.
It was gratifying to see the improvement in performance. In response to Part (f),
many students answered correctly, with a variety of lexical choices, including ‘pro￾fessional’. Teachers are to be congratulated and are urged to make every effort to
ensure that the improvement is sustained, by making clear to candidates the particular
nature of the text for this question and the type of response required.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage on
the importance of investing in social services. The overall performance on this ques￾tion was good, and there was, no substantial difference between the performances in
- 4 -
Question 2 and Question 3.
Many candidates failed to answer correctly one of the interpretive questions; they
were unable to distiguish between “narrative, argumentative and descriptive” in a
characterisation of the passage. Part (d) also went beyond the mere factual, and
required candidates to perceive and appreciate the metaphorical expression of the
author. This part was quite well answered.
Teachers should make sure that candidates are able to perceive the different kinds
of responses required, for example, the difference between “What, according to the
passage ...?” and “What effect ...?”, “What impression ..?”. Some candidates left
these latter questions unanswered, which may suggest that they did not quite under￾stand what was required.
There still seems to be some uncertainty among some candidates as to what is a
“phase” (vis-à-vis “word”, “sentence”). Part (d) asked for `three phrases’. Some
candidates gave entire sentences. Generally speaking, candidates should be made
aware that their responses should be precise, not long-winded and explanatory, and
should most particularly NOT reproduce lengthy portions of the passage, perhaps
in the hope that somewhere in that volume lies the correct answer.
Section Three
Question 4, 5, 6 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continu￾ous prose. The most popular choice was Question 5, but Question 6 had the
highest mean. These were only a relatively small range of difference among the three
questions.
Some candidates had difficulty fitting the statement in Question 5 into their stories.
Thus these stories seemed to come to an abrupt end without the final statement
being well motivated.
There was some reduction in the incidence of candidates merely describing the
picture stimulus (Question 4). Teachers should continue to stress to candidates that
the picture stimulus requires the imaginative creation of a story. In giving freedom
to their imagination, however, candidates should not simply write their own story
unrelated (or only barely so) to the stimulus.
- 5 -
Question 6 was the most successfully done, and some candidates achieved the high￾est scores (up to 24/25) on this question. It will have been observed that in Question
5 the main protagonist is male, while in Questions 4 and 6, it is female. The examiners
strive to make the question paper gender-equal, but these were no real reason why
males should write only about their own gender and females likewise. A good short
story writer should be able to write about both male and female protagonists and
candidates should be encouraged to practise writing about a variety of themes.
While some candidates have more of a flair for short story writing than others, it is
clear that those who like to read, whatever their subjects may be, become more
familiar with words and experiences and thus give themselves an advantage over
those who do not.
Section Four
Question 7 and 8 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to write persuasively and present sound argu￾ments in Standard English. These was a marked preference for Question 8 over
Question 7, and in addition the mean for Question 8 was substantially higher than the
Question 7 mean. A further dramatic difference was the much larger percentage of
candidates receiving zero marks for Question 7 than for Question 8.
Question 7 was the more problematic of the two questions. A large number of
candidates mis-interpreted the terms “independent” and “patriotic”, both in general
and as they relate to newspapers in particular. These concepts should not be unfamil￾iar to an educated Caribbean young person and schools may wish to consider whether
sufficient attention is being paid to such basic concepts as media bias/independence/
partiality and loyalty to country/party/government, in Social Studies and Communi￾cation classes.
In one, particularly extreme case, “independent” was related to one’s ability to cook
and keep house. In other cases, there was no attempt to relate the concepts to the
particular case of the Media.
Most candidates chose Question 8. It was clearly within the current experiences of
the candidates and many were able to provide personal anecdotes to support their
arguments.
- 6 -
It is very important that candidates notice and respond to all the parts of the proposi￾tions, and to the precise instructions (‘write a letter’, ‘write an essay giving your
views’, and ‘EITHER supporting OR opposing’). For example, in Question 7,
some candidates ignored the specific allusion to ‘a newspaper’, and in Question 8
some candidates ignored ‘punished as adults’ and were content simply to argue that
16 year olds deserved to be punished for crimes committed.
The usual argumentation and writing/composition inadequacies were evident: mere
assertions without any supportive arguments or examples; misuse of pronouns; in￾correct subject-verb agreement especially where the noun subject is distant from the
verb; punctuation including paragraphing; and spelling, especially ‘there’, ‘their’.
Students should be made aware that English spelling is not generally and consistently
phonetic and the spelling of many words has to be learned individually, which is best
achieved through careful reading, punctuation including paragraphing.
GENERAL ADVICE
For the third time in recent years, one candidate was found to reproduce a published
story with amazing accuracy while another candidate reproduced a variant of a “CXC
Best Story”, retaining several chunks from the original. Teachers need to remind
candidates who are preparing to write the examination that at the very best, short
stories that demonstrate a lack of originality will not be awarded high scores. At
worst, short stories that bear a very close similarity to previous short stories or to
published work may raise suspecion of irregularity.
Teachers are again advised that, in the preparation of candidates, they should make
sure that they are familiar with the syllabus. The specific tasks set will vary from year
to year but they all fit the specifications set out in the syllabus. Further, it must be
noted that a new revised syllabus will take effect for examination from May/June
2006. Candidates should be encouraged to write legibly, conform to the instructions
(for example, maximum length of answers) and to complete the required number of
questions set.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examinations in 2004 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
In 2004, 49.5 per cent of the candidates at General Proficiency achieved Grade III and above, while 19.1 per
cent of the Basic Proficiency candidates achieved similar grades. The number of candidates taking the General
Proficiency examination was 81 120, while 3 068 sat for the Basic Proficiency examination.
The decline in the number of candidates taking Basic Proficiency continued in 2004, the numbers over the past
four years have been 4 502 (2001); 3 792 (2002); 3 777 (2003); 3 068 (2004).
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Basic Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2004 showed only a very marginal upward change over 2003. The
mean score in 2003, out of a possible 60, was 25.08 and this moved to 25.58 in 2004.
General Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2004 showed a slight decline when compared with 2003. The mean
score in Paper 01 moved downward from 34.63 in 2003 to 33.03 in 2004, out of a possible 60.
PAPER 02 - FREE RESPONSE
Basic Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 02 in 2004 was better than in 2003. The mean score increased from 22.10 in
2003 to 25.72 in 2004, out of a possible 80. Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 in
2004 was as follows:
Section 1 – Summary Skills (out of 20 marks) 5.06
Section 2 – Comprehension (out of 24 marks) 9.87
Section 3 _ Story Writing (out of 16 marks) 5.17
Section 4 – Argument (out of 20 marks) 5.62
- 3 -
General Proficiency
In Paper 02 performance, as indicated by a comparison of the section means in 2003 and 2004, is summarised
as follows:
Section 1 (Summary skills): there was an improvement in performance compared with 2003: 8.20 (2003) and
9.23 (2004)
Section 2 (Understanding): there was an improvement in performance compared with 2003: 8.22 (2003) and
9.30 (2004)
Section 3 (Story telling): there was no substantial difference in performance between 2003 and 2004: 8.84
(2003) and 8.79 (2004)
Section 4 (Argument): there was a slight decline in performance compared with 2003: 9.29 (2003) and 8.66
(2004)
Candidates’ performance in expression tasks on Paper 02 (that is, Sections 1, 3 and 4) was very similar in 2004
to what it was in 2003, with means of 26.68 and 26.33 in 2004 and 2003 respectively, out of a possible 75.
A comparison of the average mark in the four sections shows that there is little difference in performance
across the sections. It could suggest that teachers are covering all four areas evenly.
General Advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in
all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently
used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas,
upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers, whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
In Section 1, when a straightforward summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically
within the word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale, the CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates; it
should not be treated as a deletion exercise or a copying exercise.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be trained
to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked and to
frame their answers appropriately. For example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they
say ‘give a phrase’; at other times still they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give
precisely what they are asked to give. Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as
the passages on which the questions are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require
paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long
extract from the passage is a bad strategy, one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in others. Every
candidate doing this examination should have read the best stories from preceding years in order to get a sense
of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC.) These stories, however, should not be
memorised and reproduced with slight alterations.
- 4 -
In the case of Section 4, candidates should note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language
and presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions
carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that support their
points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some inexplicable reason, some candidates operate
on the assumption (consciously) or unconsciously) that they must agree with the opinion given and that if they
do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a
way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will achieve
higher scores than those they earn by merely agreeing with what they perceive to be the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE
Question 1 (Expression)
In this question candidates were asked to read an extract from a report on migration and to write a summary of
it in no more than 100 words. Candidates had to select the main information, organise it logically and present
it in standard English. All three components are important, but perhaps logical organisation of the information
is of the greatest importance in the teaching exercise. Candidates should be made aware that a summary is not
simply a series of statements presented with no expressed links between them.
Candidates were expected to identify the classes of migrants; the direction of migration; the relationship between
migration, population growth/decline and the labour market; and the consequences of migration on source
country and destination.
Performance on this question was slightly better than it was last year. However, there are still too many
candidates who pay absolutely no attention to the word limit given or dishonestly write an incorrect number of
words at the end. This latter strategy does not work.
Teachers should:
 (i) advise students against relying heavily on the original text and making just a few minor changes; and
using a deletion strategy to try to reduce the number of words in the original text
 (ii) give students more practice in distilling essential information and expressing it, as far as possible, in
their own words
(iii) advise students not to repeat points or insert too many illustrative examples of points made
(iv) above all remind students to observe the stated length
Advice to Teachers
In the training of students in summary writing, teachers should use a variety of selections, including sources
outside the textbooks, such as daily newspapers and current popular magazines. Teachers should remind
students to work with what is given – real-life material has imperfections and part of the training in summary
writing is to be able to determine what is important or critical and what is not in such material. Report and
summary writing is as much about arranging relevant points as it is about picking out the main points in what
someone else has said or written. In order to reflect the original accurately, attention should be paid to time
sequence and cause and effect relationships, as they occur in the original. Practice in the effective use of words
such as because, although, as a result and in spite of the fact that, which link clauses (containing relevant
points), will help immensely the task of summary and report writing.
- 5 -
SECTION TWO
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Eugenia O’neal’s “The Parillon Sisters”. For the most part, candidates responded correctly to
the items (a), (b), (c), (d) and (g). Item (e) was answered correctly ( = to indicate that it was not English) by
only a small percentage of candidates. Item (f) did not ask for words from the passage, which meant that those
candidates who interpreted it in that way restricted themselves unnecessarily. Item (h) was not answered
correctly by most candidates; the answer (the attitude) required was ‘pity’ or some equivalent. As usual, as
soon as the questions go beyond “who” and “what”, a great number of candidates find it difficult to cope with
inferences and implications.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward by the editor of the Weekend
Nation newspaper about the relationship between freedom and the law. Item (a) was answered incorrectly by
a great number of candidates because they did not pay attention to the instruction that only a phrase should be
given, not the whole of the first sentence. Items (b) and (c) were correctly answered by most candidates. The
answer to (c) hinged on the understanding of the word ‘ironically’, which involves an opposite relationship
(that is, contrary to expectation) between one thing and another. Item (d) required candidates to link the word
latter to a preceding idea but only a minority of candidates managed to do this successfully. Item (e), which
was intended as a straightforward question requiring an understanding of punctuation (Our supreme law, our
Constitution = Our supreme law is our Constitution), was answered correctly by only a small percentage of
candidates. Item (f) required candidates to solve a simple verbal logical problem. This was not correctly done
by most candidates. The two-part answer to (g) did not present any major problems.
Advice to Teachers
Reading of material from outside the Caribbean should help to expand the passive vocabulary and general
knowledge of students. Teachers still have to do more work on the literary devices used by writers in order to
get students to move beyond literal interpretations. In the explanation of literary devices and specific phrases/
sentences used by writers, candidates have to be accurate and precise in their answers. Teachers should
dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which really conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE
Questions 4, 5 and 6 (Expression)
Candidates did not seem to have any difficulty understanding the topics set, but there were still too many who
did not know what elements are required in short stories or who could not demonstrate those elements in their
writing. There were some candidates who wrote brilliant stories and generally candidates seemed to be reasonably
well prepared for this section of the examination. On the other hand, this section, as it usually does, exposed
the weaknesses of candidates who had not mastered the fundamentals of writing in English.
The picture stimulus in Question 4 seemed to appeal to many candidates and encouraged a variety of stories,
but this year there were more stories of a better standard. Happily, there was a smaller number of candidates
this year who just described the picture. This question elicited several excellent responses, including the one
deemed to be the ‘best story’. On the other hand, some stories had no more than a tenuous connection with the
stimulus. Teachers should remind candidates that when a story has no connection whatsoever to any of the
three stimuli given, it automatically is given zero marks.
- 6 -
Question 5 was a fairly popular choice and it produced a number of action stories. Some of these were very
good and imaginative in some cases and realistic in others. Some of these stories were awarded marks in the
top ranges. On the other hand, some candidates did not convincingly link the two parts of the stimulus together
in their stories or did not convincingly suggest that ‘life would be different’ from then on.
Question 6 was not a very popular choice. Candidates seemed to have difficulty tying the two parts of the
stimulus together. This question did not produce any outstanding stories.
Advice to Teachers
Teachers should not encourage students to over-indulge in the expression of literary devices. There has to be a
match between the setting and the action. Students whose stories are impressive are those who use details to
create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Teachers need to give all students practice in action-oriented stories and
not restrict choices to emotional stories. Boys seem to prefer the former and not the latter, and teachers, if they
want all their students to succeed, should be aware of this. Students should be encouraged, as often as possible,
to interpret topics in a positive and wholesome way and not to restrict themselves to situations of poverty,
degradation and stress. Training in short story writing should include a lot of oral work and the telling of funny
stories and anecdotes where there is a concentration on the characters and what they say. Training in short story
writing must stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading. Although there is no penalty for
writing stories that are longer than is suggested in the rubric, a perusal of the scripts reveals that longer stories
tend to be weaker as they often get out of control.
SECTION FOUR
Question 7 and 8 (Expression)
On the whole, responses in this section were satisfactory. Candidates seemed to find the topics interesting and
manageable.
In responding to the statement in Question 7 many candidates did not address all of the points and so automatically
weakened their argument. It is necessary in a question such as this for candidates to be methodical in their
answers and not to contradict earlier points made.
In the case of Question 8 most candidates agreed with the topic statement, sometimes passionately, but did little
to show any further insightfulness. Some good responses from among those who disagreed pointed out the
problems and difficulties involved in such a proposal (for example, why 15 years of age, why only young men,
who would pay for the training, where would the trainees be housed). There were many spirited and well
written responses from candidates supporting the proposal as well as those opposing it.
Advice to Teachers
More attention should be paid to the organisation of arguments, that is, paragraphing of different points with
the relevant supporting evidence. The language should be clear and the reader should have no doubt about the
writer’s position on the issues. Candidates should not contradict their stated position. Poor sentence structure,
punctuation and spelling are sources of distraction and cause the reader to lose the focus of an argument.
Careful re-reading should help to remove such distractions.
- 7 -
Basic Proficiency
SECTION ONE
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage from a daily newspaper – a commissioner of
police’s report on offences and crimes during the year 2002. The majority of candidates showed a reasonable
level of understanding of the passage, though numbers and simple statistics proved difficult for many. Most,
however, in their summary, did not mention the point about the challenges faced by the police. The stronger
candidates were able to identify the main ideas in the passage and present a response largely using their own
words. The weaker candidates often exceeded the word limit and presented responses in the exact words of the
passage. Many of these simply reproduced sections of the passage joining them together incoherently. The
majority of these failed to master the mechanics of the language.
Advice to Teachers
Teachers need to ensure that their students receive more practice in summary writing since Question 1 is
compulsory. Special attention should be paid to concord, tense and sentence structure.
SECTION TWO
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage. The chosen extract
was from Ama Ata Aidoo’s ‘Changes’. In general, the items were answered fairly well, though items (b) and
(c) proved to be much more challenging than the others. Very few candidates answered (b) correctly. In the
case of Item (d) (what kind of person), some candidates incorrectly interpreted this to mean occupation rather
than personality.
Advice to Teachers
Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set on the paper, questions requiring precise
answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure that students read questions a number of
times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the whole passage, candidates should also re￾read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to make sure that what they are thinking of
writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re-read what they have written to make sure
that it makes sense to someone reading it. As is the case generally, candidates would be helped tremendously
if they read more, which would make them more accustomed to written material.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a persuasive passage. In the one chosen, the
writer argued for a lengthening of the school year for American students. Items (a), (e) and (f) proved difficult
for most candidates. In many cases the candidates’ responses to Item (a) were not clear as to whether summer
was getting shorter in terms of days or whether it was coming to an end. In the case of Item (e), candidates
seemed to know what the word ‘attitude’ meant, but were confused with the word ‘sobering’. For Item (f)
many candidates incorrectly identified the American students as the correct response instead of students of
other industrialised nations.
- 8 -
Advice to Teachers
In preparation for Section Two teachers should give students more practice in comprehending extracts of writing
other than narrations. In fact, teachers should use various types of material from varying sources. Students
should get constant practice in responding directly and concisely to questions asked, using their own words
instead of lifting large pieces from the passage given. Students need to expand their vocabulary and one
effective way of doing this is by reading more.
SECTION THREE
Questions 4, 5 and 6 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively by writing a story based on a given
stimulus. Question 5 was the most popular choice and the least popular was Question 4, which was poorly
interpreted. In Questions 5 and 6 many candidates simply added the statement to the end of their story without
proper linkage. The majority of those who attempted Question 4 did not produce stories, but rather presented
descriptions of the boy or expositions on child care and abuse. Most of those who attempted Question 5 gave
depictions of a classroom scene so that the statement with ‘the pen’ would be relevant. However, there were a
few who depicted a farm scene because for them ‘the pen’ was an animal pen. A few of those who attempted
Question 6 based their stories on mysterious happenings, like ghosts and unidentified flying objects, but the
majority wrote stories about lies, theft and rape. The better candidates were able to develop a strong and
credible story line, presenting their work in acceptable standard English. The weaker candidates had difficulty
presenting a good story line and this was compounded by problems in the mechanics of grammar and sentence
construction. Many merely presented reports of events without conflict.
Advice to Teachers
Students should be encouraged to read more widely and practise writing more often. Students should get more
practice in writing stories based on pictures. Teachers should spend more time with students on the basic
elements of story writing. For example, students need more practice in incorporating dialogue into story writing.
They should also be given more exposure to figurative expressions.
SECTION FOUR
Questions 7 and 8 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to write persuasively in Standard English and to present sound arguments.
Many more candidates did Question 8 than Question 7. In Question 7 very few candidates were able to distinguish
between a reason and an excuse. Question 8 elicited many responses that vaguely addressed the various qualities
needed for success (for example, determination, manners, respect, hard work) rather than focus on skills and
knowledge. The stronger candidates gave evidence of persuasive techniques such as rhetorical questions,
proper use of statistics and appeal to authority. Many of these used what seemed like real life experiences to
support their positions. The weaker candidates were often very repetitive in presenting their argument. Errors
in the mechanics of writing were prevalent and many had difficulty writing continuous prose in standard English.
Often the structures used gave evidence of interference from the vernacular.
Advice to Teachers
More time needs to be spent on oral English to give the students familiarity and experience with the patterns
and rhythms of standard English. Teachers need to allot some time to teaching students to write clear opinion
statements which are supported by relevant examples.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2005 Caribbean Examinations Council ®.
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 2005
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The table below shows the marks assigned to the different papers by profiles.
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Multiple Essay
Choice
Understanding 60*/35+ 25*/15+ 85*/50+
Expression – 75 75
 TOTAL 35 90 125
* raw score + computed score
The statistics this year have to be interpreted differently because there were two examinations at General
Proficiency – one for the Caribbean generally and one for Guyana specifically. Overall comparison with
previous years may be somewhat misleading because Guyana statistics are usually below the average and
consequently removing Guyana from the general statistics causes the average to rise.
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 (Caribbean minus Guyana) 2005 (Guyana)
49.53 49.60 52.70 47.02
The performance mean (out of a total of 125) for the examination this year and previous years is as follows:
 (2003) 50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (Carib) (2005) 52.94 (Guy)
Average performance on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 (Caribbean) 2005 (Guyana)
34.63 33.09 33.67 28.78
- 3 -
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 2005
(Carib) (Guyana)
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 11.02
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 11.53
Section 3 Story Writing 8.84 8.79 9.70 8.29
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 10.26
A comparison of the average mark in the four sections for 2005 (Caribbean minus Guyana) shows that there
was a decline in performance in Section 1 (Summary skills). There are still too many candidates who come to
the examination with no knowledge of what a summary entails. The rise in the average mark for Argument is
attributable to the accessibility of the topics given.
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in all
areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently used
ones such as colons, semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper
case and lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be trained
to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked. For
example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they say ‘give a phrase’; at other times still
they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give.
Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as the passages on which the questions
are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to
a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy,
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in others. Every
candidate doing this examination should have read the best story from preceding years in order to get a sense of
what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC). These stories, however, should not be
memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. Although the question paper states word limits as mainly
approximations, the experience has been that the better candidates tend to write stories that fall within or not
too far out of the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of
control and weak. Often too, the candidates have insufficient time left to complete the paper properly. Teachers
are encouraged to help their candidates to plan their stories, focusing on building plots, intensifying conflict,
and creating a good sense of characters, instead of merely relating one or a string of events.
- 4 -
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and presentation
of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure
they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent
and clear in their presentation. Some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is,
however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most
likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think are
the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency (All territories except Guyana)
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read a passage taken from a supermarket magazine, identify the
problem (about the processing of chicken) as stated in the passage and to give Somerfield’s response to it in no
more than 120 words. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose
as in the model below:
In response to concerns that some chickens that are imported have a higher water content and
possibly other animal proteins, Somerfield has issued a statement assuring the public that its mission
is to provide quality chicken.
Somerfield further states that although it is legal to add water and proteins to chicken, if the
labelling does not adequately specify the contents, this may deceive the consumer. Somerfield assures
the public that its chickens, chilled, frozen, local or imported, undergo a process that uses water in a
controlled way for rinsing at different stages of the operation. No protein is added. Furthermore,
Somerfield has outside analysis done by an independently certified and sophisticated laboratory to
ensure quality chickens. (117 words/or below)
Performance on Question 1 this year was worse than last year. There are still too many candidates who pay
absolutely no attention to the word limit given. Some candidates did not put the reading material in proper
perspective/context and did not recognize or did not understand the statement “Adapted from Somerfield
magazine”. As usual, many candidates lifted relative portions of the passage verbatim or paraphrased them
indiscriminately. Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory reading and writing skills, assisted by a
fine vocabulary and the ability to write with purpose and a sense of audience.
Advice
To facilitate preparation for this section of the paper teachers should:
 i) remind candidates to observe the stated length.
 ii) drill candidates in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that
candidates read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical.
iii) help candidates to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills
(comprehension and composition skills)
iv) help candidates to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:-
a) using one’s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness
- 5 -
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and situa￾tion or context
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing and reading
e) correct mechanics of the language
v) stimulate candidates to read widely so that there can be an easier connection with the stimulus mate￾rial.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
This section requires candidates to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is
expected that candidates have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some ques￾tions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, candidates should know how to select words or
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also candidates need to do as the question asks: if
it requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an indication that
the candidate does not know exactly what the answer is. This is a recurrent problem which is likely to be the
kind that would respond to more oral and written practice in class with immediate feedback and discussion.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Anthony Winkler’s Going Home to Teach. The following were deemed to be the correct
answers. In the case of (a) and (d) suitable alternatives were accepted.
(a) officious/pompous
(b) three members of staff
(c) moored; ocean
(d) He disliked it
(e) Her ill-fitting dentures made her appear bad tempered, but she really had a pleasant personality
(f) School administrator/principal/headmaster
(g) She used to scold the labourers for their swearing
(a) Weaker candidates simply felt that the author thought of or was representing Dr Levy as a king. Many
of them did not pay attention to the wording of the question – “What opinion does he want you to
have?”, NOT “what does he say”.
(b) This question required candidates to make a simple mathematical deduction. Many could not. It ap￾pears that several included Dr Levy and therefore gave ‘four’ as the answer.
(c) Most candidates got one or the other of the two words (“moored”, “ocean”), but only a few got both
and many got neither. This suggests that candidates either do not know the term “metaphor” or do not
fully appreciate how it works. A few candidates ignored the stipulation that said “two words” and
wrote phrases. They received no marks as there was no indication that they knew what the words were.
(d) The question required candidates to summarize the author’s feelings about Dr Levy’s office. Most
candidates gave weak answers, answers that simply described the office.
(e) This question required evidence. Some candidates paraphrased; others simply quoted.
(f) Many candidates deduced that Dr Levy must be the principal of an institution or some kind of school
administrator. However, several candidates simply assumed that “Dr” meant medical doctor or dentist.
(g) This question also asked for evidence. Candidates needed to select the words that answered the ques￾tion (“boisterous labourers below whose profanity occasionally drifted in and buzzed her ears” did not
answer the question).
- 6 -
The responses suggest that many candidates understood the passage at the literal level. A large number also
seem to have understood some of the inner meaning, but did not understand what the questions required of
them. This seems to result from insufficient practice in, not simply how to answer questions, but also in how to
be confident about their own thoughts, how to express those thoughts in relation to specific questions and how
to make those thoughts clear to other people reading them.
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward in an article titled “Captur￾ing the Power of Classroom Assessment”. The following were deemed to be the correct answers.
(a) To remove the barriers to learning/to help candidates to overcome difficulty and learn.
(b) Teachers still pass on information to candidates/Candidates are still expected to learn it/Teachers still
employ a familiar variety of classroom assessments/Candidates still ask the critical question.
(c) Poking fun at candidates’ focus on the test above all else/trivialising their concern with the test.
(d) It seeks to involve the reader, get the reader to share his point of view/It seeks to establish solidarity/
direct appeal.
(e) He is careful in making his statements/not dogmatic/moderate/guarded; he is seeking to convince the
reader that he is reasonable, unbiased.
(f) It will allow teachers to assess candidates’ growth and development and identify their individual strengths
and weaknesses.
Candidates did well on questions that required no more than quoting directly from the passage. Thus, candi￾dates seemed to have little difficulty in answering (a), (b), and (f). In contrast, understanding the ‘writer’s
intent’ posed a challenge for many candidates – implicit meanings were not fully understood. Thus, (c) and (e)
proved difficult for many candidates. In attempts to answer questions, candidates wrote long sentences and
paragraphs hoping that the answer would emerge somehow.
Advice
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get candidates to move beyond literal interpretations. In the
explanation of literary devices and specific phrases and sentences used by writers, candidates have to be
accurate and precise in their answers. Teachers should dissuade candidates from giving long-winded answers
which seek to conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create
atmosphere and mood and good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving
like reports, with weak language. There were several candidates who attempted to use words and structures
with which they were not familiar. The result was that what they wrote was often verbose, sometimes unintel￾ligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help candidates feel comfortable with the sim￾plicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling based,
for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting class pro￾ductions – for listening, writing and peer interaction.
- 7 -
Two problems appearing on scripts in recent years and evident again this year were:
a) an element of what appears to be plagiarism or the writing of rehearsed stories with the ques￾tion stimulus merely tacked on;
b) essays that are not stories.
In the case of (a) teachers are advised to encourage candidates to learn from others but not represent other
people’s work as their own. On (b) candidates should be told and reminded that total failure to answer the
question results in zero marks being given to the response.
Some candidates also seem unable to differentiate description from story, especially when the stimulus is a
picture (as was the case with Question 4). Teachers should spend time helping candidates to appreciate the
power of description in storytelling but should stress the need for a story to do more than describe. This is likely
to become even more important in relation to next year’s paper which is expected to have topics for story as
well as description.
Often candidates’ ignorance of basic mechanics and spelling interferes with the examiner’s appreciation of the
story; sometimes the problem is not so great but is noticeable and affects the candidates’ marks.
Advice
Teachers should not encourage candidates to over-indulge in the expression of literary devices. There has to be
a match between the setting and the action. Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant
details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Teachers need to give all candidates practice in action-ori￾ented stories and not restrict choices to emotional stories. Candidates should be encouraged, as often as possi￾ble, to interpret topics in a positive and wholesome way and not to restrict themselves to situations of poverty,
degradation and stress. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting,
editing and proof reading.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
Candidates displayed similar strengths and weaknesses in writing argumentatively as in previous years,
although there were signs that candidates are being engaged more in how to structure their arguments. Never￾theless, too many candidates lack an awareness of topical issues. There is clear indication that they are unin￾formed about social and environmental factors within the region and globally and therefore experience great
difficulty in responding adequately to the topics. Candidates at this stage of their education need to read more
about what is happening around them; get information that can inform their opinion; and see how opinions are
expressed in various media. Despite the apparent ‘closeness’ of the topics to the candidates’ experiences, too
many candidates were unable to take their arguments to the level expected. Some who have an opinion express
their position in somewhat parochial and pedestrian ways. Others who had one idea kept repeating that idea
throughout the essay.
It is noticeable where candidates have been ‘taught’ how to organize their points in paragraphs. In a few cases
candidates had very similar beginning and closing statements. For example, several responses from the same
centre had essays that began: “It is fundamentally correct ...” and ended: “I conclude by restating...” This kind
of slavish reproduction should not be encouraged.
- 8 -
In summary the following were identified in candidates’ responses:
Candidates who displayed superiority understood the demands of the topic; identified their audience;
cogently presented their points and argued effectively using appropriate devices. Competent candi￾dates demonstrated some ability to raise points, but faltered on argumentation. Weak responses came
from candidates who had some knowledge of the topics, but lacked the skills of argumentation and
displayed very weak language skills.
General Proficiency (Guyana)
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to write a letter to their school principal pointing out the most important
information about an advertised youth symposium. Candidates were expected to identify the time and place of
the symposium, the topics to be covered, the contacts and deadlines. Candidates were expected to organise the
information and present it in continuous prose in not more than 100 words, as in the model below:
I am inviting you to the National Youth Symposium sponsored by the government and NGOs
on the Challenges of Adolescent Health to be held at the Obana Conference Centre, January 8,
2006. Sessions are designed for youth and other persons. The sessions will be conducted by
experts in the field of nutrition, human sexuality and diseases, drugs and other social issues.
Bukawela Tudor will deliver the feature address. There will be testimonials from other influen￾tial young people and live entertainment. For information on registration and other details
contact Yvonne Dalton at 111 2615 by December 15, 2005.
The format of the presentation lent itself to better summarising and there was consequently a much higher
average achieved on this question than in previous years.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
Candidates were given a passage from O.R. Dathorne’s Dele’s child and were asked to answer eight questions
on the passage.
(c) was the simplest of the questions requiring only a restatement of the last part of sentence 2 in paragraph 2.
Most candidates had no trouble with this question, even though some thought it necessary to write lengthy
paraphrases.
(a) was also a simple question which could be answered after a first reading of the passage. Only a minority of
candidates had difficulty with this question.
(b) presented most candidates with little difficulty because it involved a straightforward contrast between
sentence 2 and sentence 3.
(d) required candidates to read paragraph 2 and to come up with a word or phrase summarising the narrator’s
state of mind as evidenced in words such as ‘spit at’, ‘hate’, ‘I checked myself suddenly’, ‘viciously’, ‘Damn
them’. Any equivalent of ‘unstable’, ‘resentful’ or ‘bitter’ was acceptable. Many candidates did not understand
the phrase ‘state of mind’.
(e) may initially have seemed difficult, but the repetition of the idea of stillness/quietness no less than five
times in lines 4-7 made the answer relatively simple.
- 9 -
(f) sought to find out whether candidates understood a sentence final comment by the narrator showing the
difference between what was officially announced and the narrator’s view of the matter (that he did not agree
with it). This question proved difficult for most candidates.
(g) required the candidates to identify the narrator’s reaction of hostility or anger to not being remembered.
This partially overlapped with (d). Performance on this question was moderate.
(h) required candidates to identify ‘kind/kindness’ as a word being used sarcastically by the narrator. Most
candidates did not seem to understand what sarcasm meant.
Question 3
Candidates were presented with an argumentative letter written to the editor of the Gleaner newspaper and
asked to answer six questions on it.
(b) and (c) proved straightforward for most candidates. The most superficial reading of the passage would have
allowed candidates to identify the ‘major event’ as a hurricane or more specifically Hurricane Ivan. Question
(c) was based on paragraph 2 which identified ‘laws of physical health’, ‘moral laws’ and ‘environmental
laws’. Candidates variously gave one, two or all three parts in their responses
(a) and (d) were answered by most candidates by directly citing parts of the passage – (a) ‘mankind’s interven￾tions’; (d) ‘The Creator has equipped us with intelligence ... inform ourselves’. While (a) was answered
correctly by most candidates, the reverse was true of (d).
(e) proved to be difficult for many candidates because it required a careful reading of paragraph 3 to work out
the answer rather than just a quotation from the paragraph or a reliance on religious beliefs.
(f) was basically straightforward, but candidates had to identify the ‘object’ precisely (‘hot stove’). Answers
such as ‘hot stove principle’ or ‘stove’ did not get full marks.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
There were several stories of a much higher quality than usual, but the usual weaknesses surfaced in responses
in this section. In the case of Question 4, the picture stimulus, there was the usual problem of concentration on
description of the picture. Yet, there were several good stories given in response. In the case of 5 and 6, there
were too many stories with tenuous connections to the stimulus; and, more generally, there was an inability to
write a short story.
Recommendations for improvement in story writing given elsewhere in this report apply here.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
Performance in this section was much better than in previous years. Candidates seemed to find the topics
familiar and to their liking and therefore produced better arguments. In the case of Question 7, which referred
to “the government”, some candidates took this as an opportunity to attack or defend a political party, accord￾ing to their own political persuasion. In many cases bias prevented candidates from presenting reasoned
arguments. In the case of Question 8 consistency in argument usually provided the critical division between
good and weak answers.
The same recommendations for improvement in argument given elsewhere in this report apply here.
- 10 -
Basic Proficiency
General Comments
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The table below shows the marks assigned to the different papers by profiles.
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Multiple Essay
Choice
Understanding 60 24 84
Expression – 56 56
 TOTAL 60 80 140
There was a slight increase in the number of candidates taking the examination in 2005:
4,502 (2001) ∅ 3,792 (2002) ∅ 3777 (2003) ∅ 3,063 (2004) ∅ 3,504 (2005).
The statistics show a significant increase in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in
2005:– 16.20 % (2003) ∅ 16.78% (2004) ∅ 29.42% (2005).
The performance mean over the last eight years has been up and down, but in 2005 it was better than the three
previous years:-
(1998) 53.13 – (1999) 51.32 – (2000) 56.57 – (2001) 55.08 – (2002) 49.57 – (2003) 47.17 ∅ (2004)
49.62 ∅ (2005) 52.28.
Detailed Comments
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2005 showed an upward change over 2004. The mean score in 2004,
out of a possible 60, was 25.58 and this moved to 27.84 in 2005.
Paper 02 - Free Response
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows:
2004 2005
Section 1 Summary skills (20 marks) 5.06 5.56
Section 2 Comprehension (24 marks) 9.87 9.93
Section 3 Story Writing (16 marks) 5.17 5.14
Section 4 Argument (20 marks) 5.62 6.90
- 11 -
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage written in continuous prose. The level of
interpretation of the candidates who attempted this question was poor. Many of them used their personal
experiences to give meaning to the responses. This was probably because they found the passage too difficult.
Indeed very few candidates gave evidence of a clear understanding of the passage. The weaker candidates
showed complete misunderstanding of the passage and wrote responses which demonstrated incompetence. In
addition most candidates presented responses with just sentence fragments and lack of overall cohesiveness.
They displayed lack of organization of material and their sequencing was poor. Many candidates simply repro￾duced the passage while others in their effort to use their own words exceeded the word limit without including
the main points. The relatively few candidates who were able to identify the relevant points were to some
extent able to give reasonable responses to the question. A few demonstrated ability which was seemingly
above the level of Basic Proficiency. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in
continuous prose as in the model below:
Model Answer
When industrialisation started it was marked by terrible working conditions which would be unacceptable
today. Working hours were based on those of peasants and handicraftsmen, the only workers at the time, and
varied between 12 to 14 hours each day. Many of the workers were children who were among the persons who
could most easily leave agriculture.
Inexperienced workers using machinery exposed themselves to the risk of injury. Protective measures were
introduced and improved, recognising the advances in technologies and the importance placed on human life
and safety.
Advice
It is recommended to teachers that they pay particular attention to concord, tense and sentence structure and
reinforce the skills needed in summary writing. Teachers must be aware that in some cases English needs to be
taught as a second language and so second language approaches need to be adopted if there is to be an improve￾ment in the level of results of these candidates.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage in Standard English. It
assessed their ability to use interpretative and analytical skills. (b) posed the greatest difficulty. Most of the
candidates based their answers on the increase on size of the family instead of stating that there was difficulty
in identifying who was related to whom. Candidates also encountered great difficulty in responding to (e).
As was the case in (b), many failed to score in (e). However, (f) proved to be the easiest and most candidates
were able to give the correct response.
- 12 -
Advice
It is recommended that teachers concentrate on teaching comprehension skills, especially inference, with
particular reference to reading material. Candidates need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set
on the paper, questions requiring precise answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure
that candidates read questions a number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the
whole passage, candidates should also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to
make sure that what they are thinking of writing is what the passage says. Candidates should be advised to re￾read what they have written to make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it.
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a persuasive passage written in Standard
English. Most candidates interpreted (c), (e) and (f) satisfactorily but had difficulty with (a), (b) and (d). The
majority of candidates performed best on question (e). Many were also able to answer (c) and (f) correctly. In
question ‘a’ however many candidates thought that ‘Menu Dining and Entertainment Curacao’ was a restaurant
and focussed on getting food. For (b) the majority of candidates did not focus on the word ‘precisely’ and gave
responses like ‘the Caribbean’, ‘locals’, ‘international people’. The overall performance of the candidates
showed an improvement over former years. Most candidates attempted this question and many of them earned
six marks and more. It was encouraging to see so many candidates recognizing the passage as persuasive
writing.
Advice
It is recommended that teachers reinforce the recognition of the different types of writing. More attention needs
to be paid to identifying relevant information relating to particular questions set on chosen passages. Candi￾dates also need to do much more reading. More attention should be paid to spelling and punctuation.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continuous prose. The most
popular question in this section was question 5, but questions 6 and 4 were done by an appreciable number of
candidates. In response to question 4, many candidates wrote descriptively and ignored several elements of
the story. In question 5, generally the sequence of events resulting in the disappearance of the character was
credible. However, there were several stories which had a tenuous link with the stimulus. In question 6 the
interpretation of ‘surprise’ was limited; the majority created ‘birthday surprises’ or the ‘surprise’ of meeting
their father for the first time. In addition to this, there were many stories in which the link with the stimulus was
weak. There were also a few candidates who fused the three topics into one story. There were a few candidates
who demonstrated superiority and many scripts demonstrated competence. The majority of scripts were of the
level of Range 3 (5-8 marks). There were a few in Range 1 where the candidates showed total inability to write
Standard English. Much work needs to be done in developing candidates’ narrative skills. Similarly, structures
of Standard English need to be taught in a systematic way. In very many cases the lack of competence in
Standard English interfered with the story line.
- 13 -
Advice
It is recommended that candidates be encouraged to read more widely in order to develop a richer vocabulary
and so avoid mundane expressions. They need more practice in writing short stories and in incorporating
dialogue in story writing. They should be given more exposure to figurative interpretations. This can be done
by using model short stories and musical ballads. Candidates should be encouraged to edit their work before
they write the final draft.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
This section tested the candidates’ ability to write persuasively and present sound arguments in continuous
Standard English. In question 7 a few candidates took the word ‘argument’ to mean a confrontation between
two persons and so they wrote a dramatic sketch. Many had difficulty dealing with all parts of the stimulus.
Most of these wrote about ‘getting tough’ and ignored the expulsion component. A few wrote about how
candidates should ‘deal with violence’ when other candidates provoked them. Expulsion was often confused
with suspension. Candidates who performed creditably showed an understanding of a good essay format with
an introduction, a body with well-developed paragraphs and a conclusion. These candidates also made use of
various persuasive techniques such as the rhetorical question, repetition, statistical data, authoritative state￾ments, personal appeal and suitable quotations. Weaker candidates were generally unable to clarify a position
in response to the stimulus beyond stating agreement and disagreement. While most of these candidates were
able to make a few relevant statements there was very little evidence of ability to link and develop these ideas.
Very few used paragraphs. Much of the language used was closer to the vernacular than to Standard English.
Poor spelling made words almost impossible to be recognized: ‘schped behavyer’ for stupid behaviour,
‘armynetions’ for ammunition. Most of these candidates were unable to write clear introductions or relevant
conclusions.
Advice
It is recommended that teachers pay greater attention to subject/verb agreement. Candidates must be encour￾aged to use their dictionaries to improve their spelling and vocabulary. They need more practice in logical
development of argument, use of rhetorical questions and appropriate use of figurative language. It is felt too
that candidates should be encouraged to do research on popular topics based on issues on the radio and the
news-papers. Candidates need to be given many opportunities to write. Debates and discussions provide op￾portunity for candidates to practice expressing opinion. Reading West Indian literature that uses the vernacular
and discussing the difference between this and Standard English can develop the candidates’ ability to distin￾guish between the two. Candidates need more practice in the use of topic sentences and paragraphs.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2006
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2006 Caribbean Examinations Council ®.
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2006
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
The examination in 2006 was the first year the revised syllabus was assessed. Paper 01, the multiple choice
paper, tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper,
tested the Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and
persuasive writing. In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story writing and
description. The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two
papers is as follows:-
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
 Multiple Essay
 Choice
Understanding 60*46+ 40*30+ 76+ = 40%
Expression – 90*114+ 114+ = 60%
* raw score
+ weighted mark
The statistics this year have to be read more carefully because of the changes in the marks allotted and the
changes in the weighting in Paper 02.
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows:
——— ——— ——— ———
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 125) for 2003-2005 and (out of a total of 190*)
for 2006 is as follows:
(2003)50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (2006) 41.51
Average performance over the last four years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks
is as follows:
——— ——— ——— ———
2005
52.70
2006
48.54
2004
49.60
2003
49.53
2005
33.67
2006
32.36
2004
33.09
2003
34.63
- 3 -
Average performance (2003-2005) in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is given below.
Average performance in 2006 is given out of 25 for comparison with previous years and also out of the
relevant 2006 totals.
2003 2004 2005 2006
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 8.66/10.40 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 10.85/12.15 (28)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description 8.84 8.79 9.70 10.22/14.31 (35)
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 9.75/13.65 (35)
There was improvement in performance in Section 2 (Comprehension) and Section 3 (Story Writing/
Description).
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in
all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently
used ones such as colons, semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas,
upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
Students should come to the exam with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question, that is, identifying
the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy, producing a fair copy. This is especially important in
writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers
should advise each student, based on the student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough
copy to a fair copy under CXC examination conditions. Teachers should give students specific instructions
about deleting and editing in order that markers can read and understand what the candidate intended without
undue difficulty.
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced verbatim by the candidate, CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates.
Some of the better candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings
or insert extraneous material. This is penalised. Therefore, those candidates who are seeking to achieve full
marks or high marks should make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked.
For example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they say ‘give a phrase’; at other times
still they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give.
Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as the passages on which the questions
are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to
- 4 -
a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy,
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking in this case, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in
others. Every candidate doing this examination should have read the best story from preceding years in order
to get a sense of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC). These stories, however,
should not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. Although the question paper states word
limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the better students tend to write stories that fall
within or not too far out of the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be
rambling, out of control and weak. Often too, students who write excessively long stories have insufficient
time left to complete the paper properly. Teachers are encouraged to help their students to plan their stories,
focus on building plots, intensifying conflict, creating a good sense of character, instead of merely relating
one or a string of events. Candidates should not memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating
escapes the attention of the examiners.
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and presentation
of sound points, supported by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure
they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that corroborate their points and be
consistent and clear in their presentation. For some inexplicable reason, some candidates operate on the
assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not,
they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as
to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than
if they merely agree with what they think is the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read a passage taken from a newsletter and to summarise in no more
than 120 words the major factors which contribute to the disadvantages encountered by women in the labour
market . Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose.
According to the passage, the major factors contributing to disadvantages are:
• limited access to stable and well paid employment
• inability to pay for public education/training
• inability to qualify for entry to training
• choice of ‘feminine’ and non-technical fields in training
• socio-cultural factors in the attitudes of key people
• private sector training that possibly reinforces gender roles and biases.
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ
but still give the critical information needed:
- 5 -
(1) Many factors contribute to the disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market. Women have
limited access to stable, well-paid employment and are confined to ‘feminine’ work. In vocational
courses women opt for less technical fields which narrow their opportunities. Women are also faced
with the attitudes of employers and society itself when they seek employment. This is due to socio￾cultural factors. In poor countries, women are disadvantaged in secondary or tertiary education
because of entrance requirements or the cost of courses. Although numerous programmes are put in
place by non-governmental organizations, they do not look at the impact of this training due to lack of
monitoring and reporting. Such programmes may reinforce existing gender roles and biases. [118
words]
(2) Though women have increasing opportunity to earn income, they are still disadvantaged economically,
being mostly restricted to low-level, low-paying jobs. Contributing factors include low female enrolment
in the technical-vocational areas that pay well. Females make some poor choices in areas of study
because of their own values. They are influenced by other negative social attitudes towards various
areas of employment. Another factor is that the school system does not help already disadvantaged
girls to reach the entry requirements for technical training nor can they pay the high costs. Informal
training is provided by private companies, but the quality of this training is not monitored, and it may
only serve to maintain a negative situation. [114 words]
(3) The main factors that contribute to the disadvantages found by women in the world of work are
educational and social. In relation to formal education and training, many women in most parts of the
world cannot afford or do not qualify for entry to post-primary institutions. Those who do often
restrict themselves to non-technical “feminine” subjects. This practice is reinforced by society and
helps to limit the women in their job choices. Non-formal training is available in private institutions,
but the courses in these situations are inadequately monitored and might reinforce the negative attitudes
and gender issues that are already contributing to the disadvantages faced by these women in the
arena of work. [113 words]
Performance on Question 1 this year was just marginally below last year’s. There are still too many presumably
genuine attempts which pay absolutely no attention to the word limit given. Some candidates operate with the
casual assumption that excess will be overlooked in all answers. This absolutely does not apply to Question
1. As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage of varying lengths verbatim, or paraphrased them
indiscriminately. Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without
any injection of extraneous material, that is, material not found in the passage.
Advice
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should:
(i) remind students to observe the stated length.
(ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that
students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical.
(iii) help students to recognise the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills
(comprehension and composition skills)
(iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:-
a) using one’s own words as far as possible
b) using plain English with clarity and conciseness
- 6 -
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and situation/
context
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading
e) observing correct mechanics of the language
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is
expected that students have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some questions
require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, students should know how to select word or phrases (as
required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question asks: if it requires ‘a
word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an indication that the student
does not know exactly what the answer is. This is a recurrent problem which is likely to be the kind that would
respond to more oral and written practice in class with immediate feedback and discussion.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Michael Anthony’s “Pita of the Deep Blue Sea”. The following were deemed to be the correct
answers:
(a) Pita/the fish
(b) fast moving action; suspense; tension
(c) panic; anxiety; frustration; desperation
(d) to show the tremendous effort being made to escape
(e) the net
(f) because that is where the fate of the fish was decided, where death took place
(g) he was now free
(h) it was the sound of the place where he would have died
(a) This question was answered correctly by most candidates. The initial difficulty which candidates had
to overcome was that the fish was given a name. Where candidates did not come to terms with this, the
passage as a whole was not well understood.
(b) This question was not answered correctly by most candidates. It is the type of question which reflects
the level of instruction candidates received, since it deals with a writer’s craft.
(c) This question did not present great difficulty to most candidates. However, some candidates answered
the question with words that were extreme or too vague.
(d) It was not satisfactory to make a general statement, that is, that ‘repeat’ means ‘emphasis’. Candidates
needed to explain this specific situation. Candidates had to demonstrate that they understood the
passage.
- 7 -
(e) As in (a), candidates had to interpret the element of personification/animation correctly. Many candidates
were unable to do this.
(f) Some candidates interpreted ‘fateful’ as “faithful’.
(g) This question did not present great difficulty to most candidates.
(h) This proved a difficult question for most candidates. Candidates needed to formulate their answers
based on an understanding of the whole passage.
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward in an article extracted
from Time magazine. The following were deemed to be the correct answers:
(a) The debate is ‘Can people be overweight but still healthy?’
(b) The phrase suggests that most people are involved in the debate or that the debate is worldwide.
Alternatively, the phrase gives weight to the issue or shows the importance of it.
(c) The impression that the writer wants to convey is that people take sides or that people hold
strongly to particular views or that there are conflicting views.
(d) The writer uses the word ‘however’ to point out that other persons hold a contrasting view.
(e) The most important point in the last paragraph is that fitness and size are equally important.
(f) Two factors are people should eat well and people should exercise regularly.
(g) [As a result of confusion about the numbering of paragraphs, this question was removed from
the examination and not marked]
(h) The writer is referring to fitness proponents.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) As usual, the word ‘effect’ was beyond the competence of the majority of candidates.
(c) In this case, the word ‘impression’ did not constitute any major difficulty. Most candidates were able
to formulate satisfactory answers to this question.
(d) Most candidates understood that ‘however’ introduced a contrast and were able to formulate a correct
answer.
(e) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(f) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(h) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
- 8 -
Advice
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond literal interpretations. In the
explanation of literary devices and specific phrases/sentences used by writers, candidates have to be accurate
and precise in their answers. Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which
rarely conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterisation, good and effective use of details to create
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving like
reports, with weak language. There were several students who attempted to use words and structures with
which they were not familiar. The result was that what they wrote was often verbose, sometimes unintelligible
in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the simplicity of
language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling based, for
instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting class productions
– for listening, writing and peer interaction.
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked
appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must be
linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive
interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. Choice of features
to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. Description,
even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.)
must be clearly established. If characters are being described, they must be sufficiently developed. Dialogue,
when used, should be functional (e.g. to develop character, atmosphere, mood, etc.) There should be varied
and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create characters,
moods, tones, atmosphere and setting.
A specific problem which arose this year is that a vast number of candidates did not seem to be aware of the
change made to Section 3, which now asked for a description in Question 6. Since this may not have been the
fault of the candidates themselves and it is possible that in spite of the long lead time given they were not
informed and prepared by their teachers, it was decided not to penalise candidates who wrote a story in answer
to Question 6. This concession will not be repeated next year.
There were not many problems with Question 4. It produced a range of responses with several that were
mainly descriptions. However, most candidates were able to integrate the picture into a story. Most candidates
wrote stories with a theme of a lost son or daughter. Several stories described the old woman, her condition
and circumstances and then developed the plot.
Question 5 was a popular choice, but it produced a preponderance of mediocre stories with hardly any superior
writing. It encouraged candidates to create humour which sometimes was not more than simplistic. Many
responses to Question 5 merely had the stimulus quotation tacked on and not satisfactorily integrated into the
plot.
In the case of Question 6, a great number of candidates proceeded to write a response without reading the
instructions carefully. In the relevant responses to this question, various situations were created – a person
returning home from abroad, a person returning after many years, a person coming to the scene after a disaster
and many others. The good responses to this question used details to create pictures of the environment, made
comparisons or reflections that justified the comment “... she felt like she was in another country” and expressed
- 9 -
thoughts and feelings suited to the situation. Although the question itself assisted with what should be described
– “what she saw and her thoughts and feelings”, many students did not follow the instructions of the question.
Advice
Use more and varied pictures to help stimulate and guide writing. This would help to stimulate classroom
writing e.g. help students focus on use of details to create character, emotion, atmosphere, etc. The creation of
humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing classes – how to tell a joke,
how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story-writing that might interest even reluctant
writers. How to use language effectively to do all this e.g. use of short sentences and exclamation marks for
effect could be a natural way of calling attention to form.
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. A lot more
story reading in preference to talking about story-writing elements. Candidates whose stories are impressive
are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Training in short story writing
must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
A majority of the candidates chose Question 8, while Question 7 was challenging for many who did it. In
relation to the former, some candidates lambasted the Minister of Education instead of taking a stance, giving
solid and strong arguments, expanding the arguments, sustaining a position and employing argumentative
techniques. In relation to Question 7, too many responses lacked substance and information from which
candidates could argue. Those who performed well on this topic most likely had the advantage of knowledge
from Social Studies and were current with topical issues such as C(aribbean) S(ingle) M(arket) and E(conomy).
Unfortunately, many candidates had no knowledge of Caricom as a regional institution and thus could not
argue about what the ‘movement of skilled professionals’ could mean for the region.
In general, candidates who displayed superiority understood the demands of the topic, identified their audience,
cogently presented their points and argued effectively using appropriate devices. Competent candidates
demonstrated some ability to raise points, but faltered on argumentation. Weak responses came from candidates
who had little or only vague knowledge of the topic and lacked the skills of argumentation.
Advice
Students need to be guided about the difference between ‘arguing’ and ‘quarrelling’. Students should be
warned against making unsubstantiated, partisan political statements in an essay that requires logical arguments
illustrated with relevant examples.
Basic Proficiency
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Understanding and Expression) across the two papers is as
follows:-
- 10 -
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
 Multiple Essay
 Choice
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression – 65 65 = 40%
There was a decrease in the number of candidates taking the examination in 2006:
4,502(2001) 3,792(2002) 3,777 (2003) 3,063 (2004) 3,063 (2005) 3,089 (2006).
There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2006:
16.20%(2003) 16.78%(2004) 29.42%(2005) 26.51%(2006).
The performance mean over the last nine years has been up and down, but in 2006 it was better than most of
the previous years:
(1998) 53.13 – (1999) 51.32 – (2000) 56.57 – (2001) 55.08 – (2002) 49.57 – (2003) 47.17 (2004) 49.62 (2005)
52.28 (2006) 56.13 [actually 60.14 out of 150].
Not enough students are demonstrating competence in Profile II (expression). Students seem oblivious to
spelling rules and their spelling is particularly weak and increasingly phonetic. The concept of paragraphing is
ignored and, generally, punctuation is limited to full stops and commas.
There is increasing evidence that some candidates are short of ideas or material. For instance, some candidates
used the passage in Question 1 as a response to Question 7 or in support of the moot in Question 8 and some
candidates used Question 2 as material to answer Section III.
Detailed Comments
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2006 showed an upward change over 2005. The mean score in 2005,
out of a possible 60, was 27.84 and this moved to 28.14 in 2006.
- 11 -
Paper 02 - Free Response
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows:
2004 2005 2006
Section 1 Summary skills (20 marks) 5.06 5.56 4.78/7.17 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension (24 marks) 9.87 9.93 10.99/12.36 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description (16 marks) 5.17 5.14 5.32/6.65 (20)
Section 4 Argument (20 marks) 5.62 6.9 6.90/8.62 (25)
* Under 2006 the mark given first is for purposes of comparison with previous years and the second mark
given is the actual average of out the 2006 totals for each section.
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression)
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage written in continuous prose taken from the
San Juan Star newspaper. The passage examined the link between media violence and children’s behaviour.
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ
but still give the critical information needed:
1. Studies show that violence in the electronic media is linked to violence in society. Children exposed to
such violence may imitate the acts and the actors who commit them. Consequently, their minds are
becoming seriously affected as they begin to see life as an exciting game, not as reality. Parents do not
always fully understand how damaging these violent acts are. Parents, therefore, should be more
attentive to these shows and discuss them with their children. [76 words]
2. Studies show a link between children’s behaviours and the violence and aggression they are exposed
to via television, movies and video games. These studies are important because, to deal effectively
with the problem, we have to understand it thoroughly. Constant exposure to violence and aggression
causes children to imitate these behaviours and view them as normal – even exciting! Parents don’t
realize how awful some video games are. They need to be more vigilant and talk to their children,
many of whom see life as a game. Some don’t even know what is real and what is not. [97 words]
3. Studies show a link between children’s behaviours and the violence and aggression they are exposed
to via audio-visual and interactive media. This exposure causes children to admire and imitate acts of
aggression and violence. In fact, it makes them see life as a game and some cannot tell the difference
between fantasy and reality. Parents and adults do not realise how awful video games are. They need
to be more aware and discuss the negative content with their children. We need to understand the
problem thoroughly so that we can deal with it effectively. [94 words]
Too many students exceeded the word limit. Too many students were unable to use their own words in their
attempt to summarise the passage. Many merely lifted parts of the passage and combined these to form a
summary. A few candidates responded to the topic at an emotional level and were very forthright in expressing
their views. The result was more an argument than a summary and therefore provided no basis for assessment
of summary skills.
- 12 -
Advice
Exercises in summary writing should include passages that are contentious in their subject matter. In such
cases, students should be taught to remain calm in the face of arguments they do not agree with and to summarise
the argument given rather than to respond to it.
In order to help students express themselves logically and concisely, teachers should provide students with
ample exercises in making construction shifts and in recognising and writing equivalent sentences. Students
should be encouraged to constantly review the collective nouns they have learnt from primary school and to
enrich their vocabulary by regular reading of good literature. One way of doing this would be to have a
classroom book club.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage written in Standard English
taken from Nailah Folami Imoja’s Pick of the Crop. It assessed their ability to use interpretative and analytical
skills. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions asked:
(a) Leroi had to stay humble because his mother reprimanded him if he wasn’t.
(b) Ma regarded him as his own man; she stopped sitting by the door; she stopped waiting up for
him when he went out.
(c) Her reward was that he could stay at home for as long as he chose.
(d) Ma lay in bed awake at night because she was waiting for Leroi to come home.
(e) The phrase tells us that he was respectful towards his mother and didn’t want to offend her.
(f) Her opinion was that he was a good boy – he wouldn’t curse for her to hear.
The overall performance on this question was encouraging. Students performed well on questions which
required a grasp of explicit statements made in the passage (a, b, c, d), but showed some difficulty with
questions which required them to draw conclusions or make inferences (e, f) about opinions and attitudes.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(c) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(d) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(e) Many candidates had difficulty understanding and explaining ‘attitude’.
(f) Many candidates had difficulty formulating a response to the question of ‘opinion of’.
- 13 -
Advice
It is recommended that teachers concentrate on teaching comprehension skills, especially inference, with
particular reference to reading material. Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set
on the paper, questions requiring precise answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure
that students read questions a number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the
whole passage, students should also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to
make sure that what they are thinking of writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re￾read what they have written to make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it.
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand an argumentative passage written in Standard
English published in The Barbados Advocate newspaper. The following were deemed to be the correct answers
to the questions asked:
(a) The writer makes the comment because of the variety and quantity of cell phones available
and abused in public.
(b) The writer’s view of such people is that they are inconsiderate.
(c) The writer’s opinion is that people use cell phones in public to show off.
(d) The writer makes the comment because nowadays everybody has a cell phone.
(e) He refers to them as culprits because their cell phones rang at inappropriate moments and
they answered them.
(f) Two developments the writer is predicting are that new annoying traits will emerge and that
the situation will get even worse.
(g) The effect that the writer expects it to have is to cause the person not to use the cell phone
inappropriately in public.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(c) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(d) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(e) The word ‘culprit’ was not generally understood. Many answers failed to mention the idea of
‘inappropriate moments’.
(f) This proved a little more difficult than the first four because the answer was not restricted to one
sentence.
(g) Many answers did not deal with the writer’s expectation or intention.
- 14 -
Advice
In order to master this section, students should be given practice in being specific when answering questions.
There is no need to write an answer of half a page for a question that is worth two marks. Various strategies
should be employed to develop analytical skills in order to answer question which require more than just
quoting from the passage. Teachers need to get students to understand what is meant by the writer’s expectation,
intention, opinion and attitude and to realise that responses of this type require more than quoting from the
passage, they require summarising and explanation.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continuous prose. Instead of all
of the questions requiring a story, this year this section included a question (Question 5) which tested candidates’
ability to write a descriptive essay.
Question 6 was the most popular choice. In Question 4 many candidates simply described the picture while
others wrote stories which had a tenuous link with the picture. Question 5 posed the greatest challenge with
respect to interpretation. In several ‘descriptions’ ‘Al’ appeared only at the end, while in others he was nowhere
in the scene.
An appreciable number of students demonstrated competence in employing all the elements of story writing:
strong plots, good use of imagination, well-rounded characterization, appropriate resolution of conflict,
satisfactory conclusion of action, skilful selection of details and effective use of dialogue. There were a few
superior scripts. However, the majority of students continue to find this section a major challenge and some do
not even attempt any of the three questions. Weak responses included unimaginative ‘stories’ which were a
mere relation of loosely connected incidents. Other weaknesses included the following:
• Shift in perspective from first to third person and vice versa.
• Lack of or inadequate characterization
• Sudden appearance of characters; change of main character
• Underdeveloped stories
• Restricted vocabulary, faulty syntax and weak mechanics
• Stories far in excess of or below the suggested word limit.
Advice
Students should be provided with copious models of good short stories and should be taught the elements of
story writing in a systematic way. After this they should be given regular practice in writing short stories using
various stimuli. Students should be encouraged to read more widely in order to develop a more varied vocabulary.
They should be given more exposure to figurative expressions. They need more practice in incorporating
dialogue in story writing. Students should be encouraged to edit their work before they write the final draft.
- 15 -
SECTION FOUR(Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on a given topic while Question 8 required them to
defend a position.
Candidates seemed to have no particular difficulty relating to the topics given. Generally the supporting
details were pertinent to the topics. For example, candidates showed a clear understanding of the academic
underachievement of Caribbean male youth (Question 7) as well as an awareness of the sometimes harsh
realities of parenting (Question 8). Responses to Question 8, which was the more frequently answered question,
focussed on either the negative socio-economic challenges of having more than two children or the sanction
from God to “be fruitful and multiply”. Because both Question 7 and Question 8 were in two parts, in responding,
some candidates lost sight of the full argument and addressed only one part of the issue.
Weak responses ignored the use of punctuation and/or paragraphing, listed points rather than explain, expand
or illustrate them, did not adhere to logical sequencing and used transitional words and phrases inappropriately.
Some otherwise competent responses included slang words and expressions and MSN (computer) spellings.
Advice
Teachers are encouraged to continue to provide classroom activities for students to practice persuasive skills
orally. They should encourage students to ‘translate’ popular slang expressions and should use ‘teachable
moments’ to underscore the concept of appropriate use of language. They should also reinforce the conventions
of writing Standard English. Interesting newspaper editorials could be used for class discussions. This would
also help to develop students’ analytical thinking and ability to respond concisely to higher order questions
posed in Section 2. Students need more practice in logical development of argument, use of rhetorical questions
and appropriate use of figurative language. Students need to be given many opportunities to write. Students
need more practice in the use of topic sentences and paragraphs. Students would benefit from timed practice
exercises in preparation for the examination.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE 
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS 
MAY/JUNE 2007 
ENGLISH A 
Copyright © 2007 Caribbean Examinations Council ® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
- 2 -
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS 
MAY/JUNE 2007
GENERAL COMMENTS 
General Proficiency
The examination in 2007 was the second year for the revised syllabus. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, 
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the 
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and 
persuasive writing. In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story writing and 
description. The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two 
papers is as follows:- 
 
Paper 01 
Multiple Choice
Paper 02 
Essay
Total
Understanding 60* = 46 + 40* = 30 + 76 + = 40%
Expression - 90* = 114+ 114 + = 60%
Total 46 + 144 + 190 + = 100%
 * raw score 
 + computed score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows: 
 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
 49.53 49.60 52.70 50.96 49.01 
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 125) for 2003-2005 and (out of a total of 190*) 
for 2006 and 2007 is as follows: 
(2003) 50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (2006) 79.14 (2007) 77.94 
 Average performance over the last five years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
 34.63 33.09 33.67 32.36 30.55 
Average performance (2003-2005) in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is given 
below. Average performance in 2006 and 2007 is given out of the relevant totals. 
- 3 -
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 10.40 (30) 10.04 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 12.58 (28) 15.45 (29)
Section 3 Story Writing 
Description 
8.84 8.79 9.70 14.31 (35) 13.62 (35) 
 10.63 (35)
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 13.65 (35) 13.74 (35)
General advice 
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language 
examination and that candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and productive (expression), in the English language. In the examination, 
these skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and 
commas, but also the not so frequently used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other 
conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of 
numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The 
kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages and text messaging is not acceptable in 
this examination. 
Students should come to the examination with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question. In 
accordance with the concept of writing as a process (abbreviated under examination conditions), candidates 
should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a 
rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, in doing a 
description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each student, 
based on the student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy under 
CXC examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting and editing so that the appearance of their 
work is not off-putting to examiners. Though examiners have to make a great effort to decipher every word 
that some candidates have written, candidates should never forget that it is their own responsibility to write 
legibly. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed the 
public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one’s ability 
to perform in the world of work. Consequently, it is not advantageous to treat English language as merely an 
academic subject or as a subject for “nerds”. 
Specific advice on the sections of Paper 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers are 
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use 
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters, policemen and 
CEOs reporting to their board of directors) and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings or 
- 4 -
insert extraneous material. This is penalised. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt to 
mislead or deceive or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. So, those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
In assessing Question 1, the examiners (keeping in mind the specified word limit) pay specific attention to 
the candidate’s ability to use his/her own language, the accuracy and coverage of the major points and the 
ability to connect the main points to make the answer read smoothly. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, 
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates’ responsibility to 
indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of 
possibilities given by the candidate. 
This section requires candidates to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that they have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some questions 
require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, candidates should know how to select word or phrases 
(as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also candidates need to do as the question asks: if it 
requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong - it is an indication 
that the candidates does not know exactly what the answer is. 
 In the preparation for Section 3 every candidate should have read the best story from preceding years in
order to get a sense of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC.) These stories should 
not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not memorise 
published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
 Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better candidates tend to write stories that fall within or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that stretch 
into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create 
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving 
like reports, with weak language. Candidates should try to improve their own techniques of story writing, 
including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good stories written 
by Caribbean authors.
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes 
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the 
simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling 
based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting 
class productions - for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Since the descriptive essay is a new option in this section, greater attention should be paid to it. Description 
must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked appropriately). 
Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must be linked 
appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive 
interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. Choice of 
features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. 
Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, 
mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of language to create 
- 5 -
picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and setting. 
- 6 -
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Candidates should pay attention to ‘tone’ and 
‘audience’ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Candidates 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspapers as well as 
short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some 
unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must 
agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, 
that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiners’ view. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
General Proficiency 
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
Question 1 
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from a popular magazine 
dealing with the history and significance of tattoos and other forms of body markings over the centuries. 
Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose in no more than 120 
words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
• Tattoos are permanent markings which have been around from the beginning of civilization. 
• They were brought to the Caribbean from Africa, China and India, but the Amerindians wore them 
even before. 
• They were used by people in the Caribbean for religious, ethnic and cultural purposes. 
• Over the years they came to be personal expressions identified with rebellion and deviance. 
• Attitudes have changed towards tattoos and today they have become acceptable as marks of 
uniqueness and difference. 
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
(1) From the beginning of civilization tattoos and other body markings have been marks of 
identification, spiritual protection and decoration. Tattoos are permanent markings which vary 
greatly and can be personally very revealing. A tattoo is an instant of your life etched forever on you 
for the world to see. 
 Tattoos and other body markings were characteristic of the Amerindians of the Caribbean as well as 
of the Africans, Chinese and Indians who came here. For all these people, they had cultural, 
spiritual and ethnic significance. Over the centuries, tattoos and other body markings have changed 
back and forth from group significance to individual significance, presenting a daily image of 
difference and uniqueness. (112 words) 
(2) Tattoos have been around from the beginning of time and were used originally as identification marks, 
spiritual protection and decoration, but now they are a popular form of self expression. Tattoos are 
permanent markings on the body which were brought to the Caribbean by slaves from Africa and 
indentured labourers from China and India, but were also used earlier by Amerindians. 
- 7 -
 Over the years tattoos have changed from being positive to negative, often being confused with 
rebellion and deviance (non-conformity). Today, tattoos are once again seen as something positive: 
they are worn by people from all walks of life, on all parts of their body, saying to the world it's all 
right to be different. (115 words) 
 (3) Tattoos have been around from the earliest of times for identification as well as for spiritual and 
decorative purposes. They are more unique and permanent than other symbols and ornaments and 
can be seen by everyone. 
 Tattoos and other body markings came to the Caribbean from Africa, China and India with slaves 
and indentured workers. Indigenous people also used tattoos for spiritual, cultural and personal 
reasons and to indicate social status. 
 Over time, tattoos displayed more personal expressions and were perceived by some to display anti￾social or deviant behaviour. Today, however, tattoos have re-emerged as signs of personal 
expression, have gained respectability and are linked with cultural and social identity and 
individuality and not merely with style. (116 words) 
Performance on Question 1 this year was about the same as last year, revealing the same strengths and 
weaknesses in candidates’ answers. There were too many candidates who did not observe the word limit 
given. Among these, some seemed to operate with the casual assumption that excess would be overlooked in 
all answers, while a few attempted to deceive the examiners by putting an incorrect number of words at the 
end of their answer. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim or paraphrased them 
indiscriminately. Candidates who approached summary writing as a deletion exercise often ended up having 
sentences or pieces of sentences which were improperly connected to what preceded, were inaccurate or 
incoherent. This was especially so in relation to paragraph three, which dealt with the different ethnic 
groups. 
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to bring different sentences and paragraphs together by the use of 
appropriate connectives and to cover all the main points. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
(i) remind students to observe the stated length. 
(ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that 
students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
(iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills 
(comprehension and composition skills) 
(iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
 a) using one’s own words as far as possible 
 b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
 c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
 d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
 e) observing correct mechanics of the language 
- 8 -
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
Performance in this section improved over last year with many candidates getting full or nearly full marks. 
There were no specific questions that candidates found particularly difficult, except for 2 (f). There were still 
a number of candidates who found it difficult to answer the question and stop, but felt the need to go on to 
write paragraph-long answers. 
Question 2 
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage taken from Noel Woodroffe’s 
Wing’s Way . The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set: 
(a) Dawn; Midday; Evening 
(b) fish/ nets; cooking; oil 
(c) the flares of the oil refinery 
a huge red ball (1 mark) 
(d) (the kind of death) found in the eyes of broken, old men 
 (the kind of death) found on abandoned coasts ... 
 the hopelessness of this backwater village 
(e) climbed 
(f) An answer which suggested struggle and difficulty 
(g) The weight of the cars on the sun-softened pitch 
(h) backwater village; missed and ignored; hopelessness of this backwater; swept clean of talent and 
vitality; dependent upon a stony earth and dwindling oil; vision of a hopeless future. 
Since 2 (f) required candidates to go beyond quoting from the passage and to construct the answer based on 
an understanding of the passage, this question was generally not well done. In many cases, it was clear that 
candidates were unable to follow the thread of meaning (as in the second paragraph of the passage) when 
sentences were beyond a certain length. 
 Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward about the ‘generation 
gap’ in an article extracted from Time magazine. The following were deemed to be the correct answers: 
(a) a large amount 
(b) the child has adult concerns; the child wants a lot of privacy; the child no longer trusts the goodwill 
of parents 
(c) not fixed; not forever; can be reversed; variable 
(d) the child’s brain has matured; the child is capable of more independent judgement 
(e) parents 
(f) (i) their powerful feelings/their social lives/social power 
 (ii) power/opinion of other boys/anxiety about masculinity 
- 9 -
(g) they still need their mothers; even though bigger than her, they have to obey her 
(h) but 
 In response to a question as uncomplicated as 3 (a) for which candidates had to construct an answer using 
their own words, what several candidates wrote was either vague, misleading or inaccurate. This was also 
the case with answers to 3 (c). 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond the literal, to make logical 
judgements and to express these accurately. 
 Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which rarely conceal ignorance. 
 Teachers should bear in mind that, in any one year, more questions like 2 (f) may occur on the examination 
paper and fewer which require direct citation from the passage. The incidence of particular question types 
will vary according to the selections the examiners make to ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers 
should therefore familiarise themselves with this section of the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to 
make sure that they provide practice for students in all the question types specified in the syllabus. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
 Questions 4, 5 and 6 
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a man showed some measure of 
distress. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the dramatic line The phone rang once 
and stopped. It rang again. This was it now. Question 6 required that candidates write a descriptive essay 
asking candidates to describe what some astronauts saw as they landed. 
Question 6 was the least popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 10% of the candidates) and 
also the one least well done on average. Question 5 was the most popular (attempted by 52%) with Question 
4 in between (attempted by 34%). Question 5 produced the best story for 2007. The overall performance on 
this section was not as good as last year. 
Question 4 produced many responses dealing with the Iraq war or with disasters of Muslims/Arabs in 
various parts of the world. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture quite well into the story and 
many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 produced a variety of stories, some very well done and others which paid little attention to the 
significance of This was it now in the rubric. Even though most responses did not capture the idea of a pre￾arranged signal, there was some element of panic or dreaming that allowed for a reasonable interpretation of 
the stimulus. As usual, many responses to this question had the stimulus quotation inserted without 
satisfactory integration into the plot. 
In the case of Question 6, a great number of candidates, as was the case last year, wrote responses without 
reading the instructions carefully. Some of the responses suggest that candidates were unfamiliar with 
description and had had no practice dealing with it. In the relevant responses to this question, some 
candidates wrote about what the astronauts saw while landing on another planet, while others wrote on what 
they saw on returning to Earth. Weaker candidates found difficulty limiting themselves to describing what 
the astronauts saw as they landed and included in their responses a narration of the previous and subsequent 
travels of the astronauts. 
- 10 -
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers should treat Section Three as having two sections - two questions requiring short stories and 
one question requiring a descriptive essay. 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing 
classes - how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story-writing 
that might interest even reluctant writers. How to use language effectively to do all this, for example, use of 
short sentences and exclamation marks for effect could be a natural way of calling attention to form. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. Candidates 
whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. 
Training in short story writing must always stress the process of thinking, drafting, editing and proof 
reading. 
Students should be explicitly made familiar with the difference between narrative and descriptive writing. 
Students should imagine themselves using a camera and describing what they see through the lens as they 
move the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary for teachers to 
get students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking 
adjectives and adverbs, students should be wary about memorising flowery phrases and sticking them willy￾nilly into descriptive essays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus specifically 
on vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and another of 
adverbs and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. Teachers need 
to make these lists cover all the senses - sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
Questions 7 and 8 
Question 7 asked candidates to present an argument for or against the use of cellular phones in school. 
Question 8 asked candidates to express their views on the topic Popular music and dance on display in the 
Caribbean today are corrupting the youth and making them irresponsible . Both these questions were within 
the immediate interest and current knowledge of candidates and candidates did not demonstrate any 
significant difference in preference for the one or the other. Even so, performance in this section this year 
was not significantly higher than last year. 
Question 7 seemed to have been predicted and was practised in many schools throughout the region. This 
resulted in well-rehearsed answers in terms of points given for or against the proposition. The better 
responses to this question displayed good argumentative techniques/rhetorical devices. In addition, they 
anticipated the arguments on the other side and countered them satisfactorily. 
 Responses to Question 8 too often failed to examine and demonstrate the cause/effect relationship between
music/dance and corrupt, indisciplined youth. They merely asserted that music and dance are a corrupting 
force and that the youth of today are corrupt. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
While it is necessary to keep abreast of topics of local interest, students also need to read and discuss in class 
wider or international topics because it is not always that topics close to their immediate and current 
experience will be given in this section. 
- 11 -
Students need constant practice in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by contrast’, ‘accordingly’ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Basic Proficiency 
The examination in 2007 was the second year for the revised syllabus. However, this examination is due to 
be discontinued after next year. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, tested most of the Understanding 
component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the Expression component of the 
syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and persuasive writing. The distribution of 
marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is as follows:- 
Paper 01 
Multiple Choice 
Paper 02 
Essay
Total
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression - 65 65 = 40%
Total 60 102 162 = 100%
The number of candidates taking the examination in 2007 declined significantly when compared with 
previous years: 
 3,473 (2005) → 3,504 (2006) → 2755 (2007). 
 There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2007: 
 29.42% (2005) → 26.51% (2006) → 25.01% (2007). 
The performance mean in 2007 was lower than in 2005 and 2006: 
(2005) 52.28 (=37%) → (2006) 60.14 (= 37%) → (2007) 57.65 (=36%). 
 DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2007 showed a decline when compared with 2005 and 2006. The 
mean score in 2005, out of a possible 60, was 27.84; this moved to 28.14 in 2006 and 27.43 in 2007. 
Paper 02 - Free Response 
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows (The numbers in brackets are 
the maximum totals for the respective questions): 
- 12 -
2004 2005 2006 2007
Section 1 Summary skills 5.06 (20) 5.56 (20) 7.17 (30) 7.35 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 9.87 (24) 9.93 (24) 12.36 (27) 12.93 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/ Description 5.17 (16) 5.14 (16) 6.65 (20) 6.29 (20)/5.20 (20)
Section 4 Argument 5.62 (20) 6.9 (20) 8.62 (25) 6.41 (25)
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
The passage to be summarized, adapted from Lester Brown’s The interdependence of nations, dealt with the 
unemployment crisis in Third World Countries. It appeared to be not only unfamiliar reading material for 
many candidates but also beyond their grasp. For example, many candidates seemed unable to fully 
understand the meaning of expressions such as to bring under the plough, unique situation in historical 
terms, profound implications, political and economic well-being of countries. 
The candidates who demonstrated competence or superiority were able to summarize the passage in 80 
words, as required, without losing either the focus or the content of the original passage. The weaker 
candidates simply lifted sections from the original passage to form a summary. As regards economy of 
expression, in several of the incompetent responses, the original passage was reproduced in a telegraphic 
style through omission of function words and transitional words and phrases, thus producing a string of 
disjointed sentences. Weaker responses also showed evidence of a lack of fundamental skills in summary 
writing. For instance, the listing of countries was quite notably preserved: “ … the densely populated 
countries of Asia, the Middle East, North Africa, Central America and the Andean Region.” 
Advice to teachers 
Students need to be exposed to a variety of reading material including basic magazines produced by 
international organisations on the health and economic conditions of people across the world. Students 
would thus expand and enrich their vocabulary by regular reading of relevant literature. This could be done 
within a classroom book club. 
In order to help students express themselves logically, precisely and concisely, teachers should provide 
students with ample exercises in making construction shifts and writing/recognizing equivalent sentences. 
Routine oral practice in the use of transitional words and phrases would also be useful. 
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
The general performance on this section was commendable to some extent. The fact that students could 
easily relate to the content of both passages resulted in a few of them integrating the content into their short 
stories. 
Question 2 sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage taken from Juliana Magloire’s The 
Sea Hawk. 
Overall, those questions which posed the greatest difficulty were 2 (c) and 2 (g), with 2 (e) proving to be the 
easiest. The stronger candidates had no problem with the questions and offered appropriate and correct 
responses to the majority of them. The weaker candidates had difficulty in interpreting the passage and the 
evidence of this was given in the nature of their responses. For example, in response to 2 (a) (What did Bo 
do for a living? ) candidates gave responses such ‘doctor’, ‘smuggler’, ‘engineer’, ‘lifeguard’ as well as 
other incorrect answers. 
- 13 -
Question 3 sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage on beauty and the beauty industry 
taken from a newspaper magazine. 
The last three questions (e-g) were better handled than the first four. Weaker candidates were unable to 
interpret expressions such as going under the knife and beauty can no longer be considered skin deep in 3 (a) 
and 3 (b) respectively. Many of the weaker candidates quoted large portions of the passage with the hope 
that these would provide the correct answer. 
Advice to teachers 
Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set on the paper, questions requiring precise 
answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure that students read the questions a 
number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the whole passage, students should 
also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to make sure that what they are 
thinking of writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re-read what they have written to 
make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it. A specific area that needs greater focus is getting 
students to recognise inference. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture featuring an old man sitting playing a 
guitar. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which ended with the words I should have known better 
than to rely on someone like that. Question 6 required candidates to describe the experience of someone 
named Chris who was seeing the city for the first time at Christmas. 
The most popular of these questions was Question 4. The least popular was Question 5 and the weakest and 
most inappropriate responses came from those who attempted Question 6. 
 In relation to Question 4 and Question 5, the stronger candidates were able to use lively vocabulary and 
imaginative settings to give better than a pedestrian recounting of incidents. They were able to develop a plot 
adequately, set up interesting conflict situations and have a satisfactory resolution. They made use of well￾selected details, had good characterization and effective use of dialogue. Their stories were credible. 
The weaker candidates demonstrated various degrees of inability to use the elements of short story writing. 
They were unable to organize events and had great difficulty in using language effectively and managing the 
mechanics of grammar. There was usually a tenuous link between stimulus and story; the ending was most 
often forced, with the result that the whole strained one’s credibility. 
In relation to Question 6, most candidates wrote responses with long introductions and focussed very little 
on the description of Chris’ experience. 
Advice to teachers 
 
Some of the weaknesses in this section that need special attention are: 
 
• Grammatical problems (tense, use of pronouns, sentence structure) 
• Mere recounting of events with little or no attempt to make the story come alive through 
development of plot, characterization, appeal to the senses, effective selection of details. 
• Poor paragraphing and ineffective use of dialogue. 
It is recommended therefore that teachers employ all available resources to: 
• teach the elements of story writing systematically; 
• provide students with models of good short stories; 
• analyse good short stories as a classroom activity; 
• clarify for students on an ongoing basis the difference between report writing and story writing; 
- 14 - • provide students with copious practice in writing stories; 
• stimulate a desire among students to read; 
• not to give up on the teaching of the mechanics of writing; 
• monitor more carefully bad handwriting and careless errors such as the pervasive ‘the’ for ‘they’. 
 
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of 
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on the topic Too much feteing and partying in the 
Caribbean today is encouraging idleness and indiscipline . Question 8 required candidates to write an 
argument either supporting or opposing the statement As soon as children reach the age of 18, they should 
leave home, find a job and live independently. 
Question 8 was the preferred one of the two. Although most students who attempted the question clearly had 
views on it, some had difficulty in effectively developing points to support their arguments. There was, 
however, evidence of attempts to expand, show cause and effect and employ persuasive techniques in the 
presentation of the essay. 
The better candidates selected relevant information and developed points clearly in support of the position 
taken. There were instances of logical development and appropriate reinforcement of the argument. Some 
candidates were able to clinch their arguments with an effective conclusion. 
There was a general weakness in expression and mechanics of writing. In weaker scripts there was a mere 
listing of points, under-developed thoughts and limited views. There was also evidence of misuse of 
prepositions, awkward syntax, sentence fragments, run-on sentences and neglect of appropriate punctuation, 
especially question marks. 
Advice to teachers 
Classroom teachers need to emphasize language expression, especially sentence structure, appropriate 
vocabulary, mechanics and organisation of argument. There is also need for more concerted teaching of 
literary devices and techniques of persuasion. This will greatly assist in the coherence of responses, 
sequencing and logical development of argument. In addition, interpretative and organisational skills need to 
be mastered by students. For this to be possible, classroom teachers, especially those whose major was 
English literature rather than language, first need to be actively aware of these skills, master them and use 
effective strategies to get students to acquire the same. 
Teachers are encouraged to continue to provide classroom activities for students to practise persuasive skills 
orally. They should encourage students to ‘translate’ popular slang expressions and should use ‘teachable 
moments’ to underscore the concept of appropriate use of language. Interesting newspaper editorials could 
be used for class discussions. This would also help to develop students’ analytical thinking and ability to 
respond concisely to higher order questions posed in Section 2. Students need more practice in logical 
development of argument, use of rhetorical questions and appropriate use of figurative language. Students 
need to be given many opportunities to write. Students need more practice in the use of topic sentences and 
paragraphs. Students would benefit from timed practice exercises in preparation for the examination. 
Too few students are demonstrating competence in Profile 2 (Expression) simply because they are having 
problems with the mechanics of writing. Students seem oblivious of spelling rules and the need to spell 
correctly. For example, in Section 3 which provided a picture stimulus of an old man playing a guitar, there 
were at least a dozen different spellings of the word ‘guitar’. One noticeable element this year was that many 
students demonstrated competence in the use of quotation marks. Apart from this, punctuation was limited to 
full stops and commas. Paragraphing was ignored this year so often, as it has been in previous years, that one 
begins to wonder whether students ever get enough practice in this aspect of writing. There is therefore a 
constant need to monitor and address these elements of writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK I THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2008 
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2008 Caribbean Examination Council ® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2008 
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency 
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for 24 per cent of the Understanding component of the 
examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the Expression component as 
well as 16 per cent Understanding (all of Section 2 and part of Question 1). In Paper 02 candidates were 
allowed a choice in Section III between story writing and description. 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is a 
follows:- 
PAPER 01
Multiple 
Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression − 90* = 114+
 144+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+ 144+
 190+
 == 100% 
 *raw score +
computed score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR*) 46.41 46.25 41.86
(T&T*) 55.81 52.54 49.56
The performance mean for the examination (out if a total of 190*) for 2006, 2007 and 2008 is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR) 77.87 77.31 74.74
(T&T) 83.44 80.12 78.58
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR) 24.34 23.26 26.24
(T&T) 26.10 24.01 26.98
*ROR – Rest of the Region excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
 T&T – Trinidad and Tobago
-3- 
Average performance (for 2008) in the component section of Paper 02 is given below. 
2008 
Section 1 Summary skills 10.42 (30) (ROR)
8.78 (30) (T&T) 
Section 2 Comprehension 8.84 (30) (ROR) 
12.98 (30) (ROR)
Section 3 Story Writing 
 Description
13.29 (35) (ROR)
14.25 (35) (T&T)
11.23 (35) (ROR)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
Section 4 Argument 12.78 (35) (ROR)
13.13 (35) (T&T)
General advice 
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language 
examination and that candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and production (expression), in the English language. In the examination, 
these skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and 
commas, but also the not so frequently used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other 
conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of 
numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence structure and paragraphing. 
Teachers should try to build on young people‟s love of text messaging and have them convert this kind of 
writing into kind that is acceptable in this examination. 
Students should come to the examination with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question. In 
accordance with the concept of writing as a process (abbreviated under examination conditions), candidates 
should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a 
rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, in doing a 
description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each individual 
student, based on the student‟s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair 
copy under CXC examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting and editing so that the appearance of their 
work is not off-putting to examiners. Even though examiners have to make a great effort to decipher every 
word that some candidates have written, candidates should never forget that it is their own responsibility to 
write legibly. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed that 
public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one‟s ability 
to perform in the world of work. Consequently, it is not advantageous to treat English language as merely 
an academic subject or as a subject for „dorks/nerds‟.
Specific advice on the section of Papers 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organized logically within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers 
are instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates 
to use their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters and 
policemen) and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates. In the case of business students who 
-4- 
may be told that an executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case here –
candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original and words 
that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself and not like a 
chopped-up version of another one. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes changes meanings or 
insert extraneous material. This is penalized. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt 
to mislead or deceived or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. So, those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
In assessing Question 1, the examiners pay specific attention to the specified word limit, the candidates 
ability to use his/her own language, the accuracy and coverage of the major points and the ability to organize 
and connect the main points to make the answer read smoothly. There is evidence to suggest that some 
candidates form Belize did not have a clear idea of what was required to achieve a satisfactory mark in 
Section 1. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, 
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates‟ responsibility to 
indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner‟s responsibility to select it out of a number of 
possibilities given by the candidates. 
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that students have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some 
questions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, students should know how to select word or 
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question asks:
if it requires „a word‟ or „a phrase‟, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an 
indication that the student does not know exactly what the answer is. 
In the preparation for Section 3 every candidates should have read the best story form preceding years in 
order to get a sense of what is required. (These „Best Stories‟ are available from CXC). These stories 
should not be memorized and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not 
memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better students tend to write stories that fall within or not to far outside the word limits. Stories that stretch 
into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create 
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving 
like reports, with weak language. Students should try to improve their own techniques of story writing, 
including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good stories written 
by Caribbean authors. 
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes 
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the 
simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral spontaneous story-telling 
based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting 
class productions – for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (for example, the different components must be 
linked appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets 
-5- 
must be linked appropriately (for example, background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). 
The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. 
Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (for 
example, visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of 
language to create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, 
atmosphere and setting. Although responses to this question have improved over the last three years, there 
are still too many candidates who are writing a story and not paying attention to the instruction given. 
In the case of section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Students should pay attention to „tone‟ and 
„audience‟ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Students 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspaper as well as 
short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some 
unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must 
agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, 
that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiner‟s view.
DETAILED COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Rest of the Region excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
SECTION ONE (Profiles – Understanding and Expression) 
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from an article in a 
magazine dealing with the sea turtles, their habits, threats to them and attempts to conserve them. 
Candidates were expected to organize the information and present it in continuous prose in no more than 120 
words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
 Turtles have been around for a very long time 
 Turtles are capable of living very long lives 
 Their number has been drastically reduced recently 
 They are endangered now because of : 
- man-made treats 
- natural features - beach erosion causing loss of eggs
loss of eggs and hatchlings to predators 
their own low rate of reproduction 
 Conservation is difficult because of the turtles‟ migratory habits
 There is now a more hopeful future since conservation attempts are being made 
 Visiting sanctuaries to observe turtles can be a rich experience. 
Following are two excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
-6- 
(1) There are seven species of turtles, ancient creatures capable of living very long lives. Yet, these 
animals are now endangered. The threats to them are both man-made and natural. Man-made threats 
include pollution, bad fishing practices and coastal development. Natural threats include predators, 
the fact that the animal lays its eggs on beaches and therefore the eggs are vulnerable, beach erosion 
and the turtle‟s own low rate of reproduction. In addition, since the turtles migrate vast distances and 
spend most of their time at sea, conservationists have difficulty in helping with their situation. Some 
attempts are being made, however, including having sanctuaries here in the Caribbean. These 
regional organisation provide the additional service of educating and entertaining visitors. (118 
words) 
(2) Sea turtles, which have been around for a very long time, are now under threat of extinction. Their 
number has decreased drastically over the last ten years because of several threats, man-made and 
natural. Man-made threats include pollution, fishing and coastal development. Natural threats 
include predators and beach erosion. Not only do eggs take a long time to hatch, but they have only a 
slim chance of coming to maturity. There are current attempts being made to conserve turtles, but 
conservation is difficult because turtles migrate long distances, do not reproduce often and nest at 
night. Organisations in the Caribbean have been working in various ways towards increasing their 
survival. Their efforts provide visitors with enriching experiences. (117 words) 
Performance on Question 1 this year was about the same as last year, revealing the same strengths and 
weaknesses in candidates‟ answers. There were still too many candidates who did not observe the word 
limit given. Among these, some seemed to operate with the casual assumption that excess would be 
overlooked in all answers, while a few attempted to deceive the examiners by putting an incorrect number of 
words at the end of their answer. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim. Candidates who 
approached summary writing as a deletion exercise often ended up having sentences or pieces of sentences 
which were improperly connected to what preceded, were inaccurate or incoherent. In most cases, such 
candidates reached the word limit when they were about two thirds in the passage and then they added a 
sentence from the last paragraph or simply disregarded the rest. As in this passage, important points may 
occur at the end and if you do not recognise them, you will lose the writer‟s main intention.
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to cover all the main points, omitting unnecessary details and 
repetitions and using language which demonstrated appropriate word choice. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
i) remind students to observe the stated length.
ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that students 
read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing 
skills(comprehension and composition skills). 
iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using one‟s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
-7- 
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
e) observing correct mechanics of the language. 
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Performance in this section was significantly below last year‟s and this was principally because of 
candidates‟ response to the poem.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of part of the poem “The way we were” by 
Maureen Roberts. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set: 
(a) West Indians 
(b) dollars and cents 
(c) It is reaction of surprise/amusement/disbelief/ sarcasm 
(d) She is confident; she thinks highly of herself; she has a sense of humour 
(e) line 23 
(f) „fingers stiff with fear‟; „vocal cords contracted with the curse of shyness‟
(g) Her attitude is (positive) appreciative, thankful. 
In the case of (a), any reasonable and appropriate alternative was accepted. Most candidates answered (b) 
incorrectly, giving shillings and pence as the answer. Since 2(c) and (d) especially required candidates to go 
beyond quoting from the passage and to make an assessment of the narrator, this question was generally not 
well done. In the case of 2(e), candidates were expected to see the difference between the harsher first part 
of the poem and the more pleasant second part and to identify where the change occurred. Only a small 
number were able to identify the point of change accurately. On the whole, therefore, Question 2 was not 
well done. This may partly be attributable to the fact that the passage was in verse. 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a letter to the editor of The Saturday Voice
newspaper about Carnival. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions asked: 
(a) She does not like it.
(b) You/We cannot; none (because it is a rhetorical question).
(c) Move/barely/swaying to.
(d) To create the impression that beads are overused.
(e) Carnival/the participants in Carnival/the costumes of Carnival
(f) Sand/Sandy colour/ the desert
(g) She uses alliteration, that is , a number of words beginning with „s‟.
(h) July
-8- 
Performance on Question 3 was better than on Question 2. However, a significant percentage of candidates 
lost marks because their answers were not precise enough, as in the case of (g) which required „alliteration‟ 
or some accurate paraphrase. Even though most candidates answered 3(h) correctly, there were some who 
could not get beyond the time of Carnival in their own country. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to grasp implied meanings and not just obvious 
ones, to make summary assessments of characters and to express these accurately. 
Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which really conceal ignorance − any 
answer which provides two or more alternatives in the hope that the examiner will select the correct one will 
automatically be awarded zero marks. 
The incidence of particular question types will vary according to the selections the examiners make to 
ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers should therefore familiarize themselves with all sections of 
the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to make sure that they provide practice for students in all the 
question types specified in the syllabus, including prose and verse. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a woman appeared to be 
screaming. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the sentences The amusing thing is 
that I didn‟t plan it this way. It was just a series of unexpected turns. Question 6 (the descriptive easy) 
required candidates to describe the scene before a match between two high school teams. 
Question 6 was the least popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 26% of the candidates) and 
also the one least well done on average. Question 4 was the most popular (attempted by 39% with Question 
5 in between in terms of the number of candidates who attempted it (35%), but the best done on average. 
Question 4 produced the best story for 2008. The overall performance on this section was about the same as 
last year. 
Question 4 produced a variety of responses. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture quite well 
into the story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 proved to be challenging for many candidates who seemed unable to illustrate a series of 
unexpected turns in their story. As usual, many responses to this question had the stimulus quotation 
inserted without satisfactory integration into the plot. 
In the cases of Question 6, there was marked improvement over last year, indicating that candidates were 
better prepared to write a descriptive essay. However, too many candidates seemed unable to resist the 
temptation to write about the match itself instead of limiting themselves to the scene just before the match. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
Teachers should treat Section Three as having two sections – two question requiring short stories and 
one question requiring a descriptive essay.
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing 
classes – how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of the story-writing 
that might interest even reluctant writers. 
-9- 
Over the years, candidates have used the story lines in films they have seen as the basis for their short 
stories. However, even though originality in story line is not an absolute requirement, candidates should not 
get into the habit of slavishly copying other people‟s material. It is not only illegal but it will also result in 
the copied parts of stories being discredited. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. Candidates 
whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. 
Training in short writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading. 
Students should be explicitly made familiar with the difference between narrative and descriptive. Students 
should imagine themselves using a camera and describing what they see through the lens as they move the 
camera gradually form left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary for teachers to get 
students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking adjectives 
and adverbs, students should be wary about memorizing flowery phrases and sticking them willy-nilly into 
descriptive essays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus specifically on 
vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and another of adverbs 
and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. Teachers need to make 
these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
Question 7 and 8
Question 7 asked candidates to present an argument for or against the idea that Caribbean countries would 
be better served if they had women as prime ministers. Question 8 asked candidates to express their views 
on the topic Planning for the future is a waste of time. Too much of our future is beyond our control. 
Candidates did not demonstrate any significant difference in performance for the one or the other question. 
Performance in this section this year was slightly lower than last year. On average, Question 8 produced 
better answers than Question 7. Most of the good responses to Question 8 outlined the benefits to be derived 
from planning and give illustrative examples. Responses to Question 7 overwhelmingly concentrated on 
traditional concepts of women arguing that such characteristics would make them either good or bad prime 
ministers respectively. Added to this, there was a fairly general assumption (except in the case of Guyanese 
candidates) that prime ministers were all-powerful. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
While this section of the paper often gives topics which are immediate to teenagers, students also need to 
keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interest. It is not always that topics close 
to the immediate and current experience of teenagers will be given in this section. 
Students need constant practise in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, „accordingly‟ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
-10- 
DETAILED COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Trinidad and Tobago
SECTION ONE (Profile – Understanding and Expression) 
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from an article in a 
magazine dealing with ethanol production in America. The topic was chosen because it was seen to be 
topical, even if not local. Candidates were expected to organize the information and present it in continuous 
prose in no more than 120 words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
 Ethanol production has increased tremendously and is still increasing 
 Ethanol seems to offer the USA a chance to become less dependent on imported oil 
 That would free the USA from concerns about oil prices and uncertainty of supply 
 However, a sufficient increase in ethanol production is unlikely because: 
- the land space to produce the corn is unavailable 
- Americans are addicted to cheaper oil 
- ethanol is less cost effective 
- ethanol production and distribution depend on oil 
- expensive basic elements need to be put in place to facilitate ethanol distribution 
Following are two excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
(1) Ethanol production in the USA has increased tremendously and is still increasing. There are 
significant benefits should the USA manage to reduce dependence on foreign oil through the 
production of ethanol. The price of oil would fall significantly; oil producing countries would have less 
power; and the USA would be less worried about fluctuating oil prices and supply. However, 
reduction of dependence on oil is unlikely. One reason is that there is insufficient land to grow the 
volume of corn needed. In addition, America has become addicted to oil which is more cost effective 
than ethanol. Also, ethanol brings problems as its production and distribution depend on the use of oil 
and require infrastructural change. (115 words) 
(2) Ethanol production in the USA has increased dramatically to the point where it exceeds the farmers‟ 
ability to produce the necessary amount of corn. Ethanol could reduce the dependence on foreign oil 
so that the USA would not be subject to fluctuating prices or the threat of interrupted oil supply. The 
price of oil would fall and the power of OPEC reduced. The biggest hindrance is that the USA does not 
have enough land to produce the required amount of corn. Furthermore, production costs are high 
and ethanol itself requires the use of oil in all stages of its production and distribution. In addition, 
since the traditional forms of distribution are unsuitable for ethanol, costly modifications need to be 
made. (120 words)
Performance on Question 1 was below standard, probably because the subject matter was not within the 
immediate interest of many candidates. Since candidates had to read the passage carefully instead of 
depending on their general knowledge of the subject, the exercise proved difficult for many of them. Many 
candidates, probably more so than usual, lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim, without 
understanding them and without properly connecting them. There were still too many candidates who did 
not observe the word limit given. 
-11- 
Suggestion for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
i) remind students to observe the stated length
ii) drill students in the skill of reading paragraphs and identifying the topic 
iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises both comprehension and 
composition skills 
iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using their own words as far as possible 
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) using connectives to achieve fluency 
d) observing correct mechanics of the language.
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Performance in this section was below last year‟s but about the same as that of 2006. On average Question 3 
was done better than Question 2. 
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage taken from Mark McWatt‟s 
Suspended Sentences: Fictions of Atonement. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the 
questions set: 
(a) rain/mud 
(b) He laughed because the idea of reaching Annandale was ridiculous/He laughed because the writer did 
not realize that it was impossible to get to Annandale in the rainy season 
(c) unpleasant/dreary/gloomy 
(d) because he could not get down the river/because he could not get to where he wanted to go 
(e) because it was isolated/because it „seemed to lie … between reality and dream‟
(f) meandered 
(g) the almost opaque curtain of rain 
(h) disgust/frustration 
Since 2(c) and (d) especially required candidates to go beyond quoting from the passage and to make an 
assessment of the narrator, this question was generally not well done. In the case of 2(e), candidates were 
expected to see the difference between the negative first part of the poem and the more pleasant second part 
and to identify where the change occurred. Only a small number were able to identify the point of change. 
-12- 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of an article in the Sunday Sun newspaper 
about „boys on the block‟. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the question asked:
(a) It gives you the topic of the passage/It tells you what the passage is about 
 
(b) Intelligent 
(c) by using a quotation from a magazine/by citing an authority/by giving evidence that it is widespread 
throughout the Caribbean 
(d) underachievers/ the unqualified/slower children 
(e) the failure of education to provide adequate, serious compensatory schooling 
(f) It will become a social cost to all of us/There boys will become liabilities 
(g) The problems must be tackled root and branch systematically and in a sustained manner 
(h) education 
As is usually the case, candidates found those questions which required identification of words from the 
passage easier than those which required a judgement or assessment. In the case of 3(a), instead of stating 
the relevance of the quotation, many candidates simply explained what it meant. A significant number of 
candidates gave the answer „Yes‟ to 3(h) and/or repeated the three alternatives in the question, showing 
clearly that they did not understand a straightforward question structure. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond the literal, to make logical 
judgements and to express these accurately. Teachers should ensure that students understand the structure 
and wording of questions and not assume that they do. Teachers should dissuade students from giving 
answers with several alternatives. Such answers are generally awarded zero marks. 
Teachers should bear in mind that questions which require judgements and assessments will always occur on 
the examination paper, in Question 2 and Question 3, the balance across the two questions differing from 
year to year. The incidence of particular question types varies to make sure that the full syllabus is covered. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a woman appeared to be 
dancing or performing a ritual or reaching for something. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story 
which included the words As my parents sat there discussing me, I could not believe what they were saying. 
This was my life, not theirs. Question 6 (the descriptive essay) required candidates to describe the scene 
from a building as people stared out at the city. Performance on this section was generally better than last 
year and candidates are coming to terms with the requirements of Question 6. 
Question 5 was by far the most popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 75%) and the best done 
on average. Question 6 was the least popular (attempted by 6% of the candidates) and Question 4 did not 
fare much better in terms of the number of candidates who attempted it (14%). The performance on 
Question 4 and 6 was about the same and it was not significantly lower than that on Question 5. 
Question 4 produced a variety of interpretations. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture into the 
story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
-13- 
Question 5 proved to be attractive to many candidates who seemed to be familiar with the situation. As a 
results, the stories were generally interesting and satisfactorily written. 
In the case of Question 6, there was variety in the responses with many candidates choosing a science-fiction 
type of story. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create 
atmosphere, mood and feelings. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, 
drafting, editing and proof reading. 
Students should continue to stress the difference between narrative and descriptive. In the case of the 
descriptive, a good approach is to imagine oneself using a camera and describing what one sees through the 
lens as one moves the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary 
for teachers to get students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrase and sentences with 
striking adjectives and adverbs, students should be wary about memorizing flowery phrases and sticking 
them willy-nilly into descriptive assays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus 
specifically on vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and 
another of adverbs and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. 
Teachers need to make these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
Question 7 and 8
Question 7 asked candidates to support one of two opinions given about who should determine employees‟ 
dress at work. Question 8 asked candidates to express their views on the topic Governments should make it 
compulsory for all householders to take precautions against natural disasters. Candidates demonstrated a 
decided preference for Question 7 over Question 8 but, on average, performance on Question 8 was 
marginally better than Question 7.
Suggestion for teachers and students 
While it is necessary to keep abreast of topics of local interest, students also need to read and discuss in class 
wider or international topics because it is not always that topic close to their immediate and current 
experience will be given in this section. 
Students need constant practice in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, „accordingly‟ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
-14- 
BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency 
The examination in 2008 was the last year for this examination. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, 
accounted for most of the Understanding component of the examination overall and Paper 02, the free 
response paper, accounted for all of the Expression component as well as part of the Understanding (all of 
section 2 and part of Question 1). In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story 
writing and description. 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is a 
follows:- 
PAPER 01
Multiple 
Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression − 65 65 = 40% 
TOTAL 60 102 165 == 100% 
 *raw score +
computed score
The number of candidates taking the examination in 2008 declined significantly when compared with 
previous years: 
Year Candidate entry 
2006 3 089
2007 2 147
2008 1 597
There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2008: 
Year % candidates acquiring 
Grade III and above
2006 26.51
2007 25.01
2008 17.62
Detailed Comments 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Candidates‟ performance in Paper 01 in 2008 was slightly better than in 2007. The mean score in 2006 was 
49 per cent, this moved to 46 per cent in 2007 and 48.35 per cent in 2008. 
-15- 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Candidates‟ performance in Paper 02 in 2008 was lower than in the preceding years. The mean score in 
2006 was 31 per cent; this declined to 29 per cent in 2007 and further declined to 26.07 per cent in 2008. 
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows (The numbers in brackets are 
the maximum totals for the respective questions): 
2006 2007 2008
Section 1 Summary skills 7.17 (30) 7.35 (30) 7.23 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 12.36 (27) 12.93 (27) 11.27 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description 6.65 (20) 6.29 (20) 
5.20 ( 20)
6.76 (20) 
7.14 (20)
Section 4 Argument 8.62 (25) 6.41 (25) 5.56 (25)
SECTION ONE (Profiles – Understanding and Expression) 
The passage to be summarized was adapted from an advertisement in a newspaper for „The Caribbean 
Awards for Excellence‟. It was organized in three sub-sections under the following headings: „Mission‟, 
„the Magnitude of our appreciation‟, „Award categories‟. The layout presented a stout challenge to some 
candidates, many of whom began their summaries with a sentence fragment that was simply a re-statement 
of the Mission Statement, but with no clear linkages. The few candidates who demonstrated competence 
were able to identify the main ideas and write the summary comprehensively. They were able to use 
standard English, organize their ideas sequentially and summarise the passage in 80 words, as required, 
without losing either the focus or the content of the original passage. 
The weaker candidates presented summaries that retained the organization and language of the original 
passage. In such cases it was difficult to assess whether the candidate had meaningfully selected relevant 
details or whether these were stumbled upon by chance. As regards economy of expression, in several of the 
incompetent responses, the original passage was reproduced in a telegraphic style, omitting function words 
and transitional words and phrases and thus producing a string of disjointed sentences. Weaker responses 
also showed evidence of a lack of fundamental skills in summary writing. For example, the three award 
categories were mentioned and subsequently elaborated: “…This includes those who…”
Apart from its layout, the language of the passage also presented difficulties to candidates, who seemed 
unfamiliar with such phrases as „increased visibility‟, „financial component‟, „scale and scope‟, „give 
impetus to‟. Some candidates interpreted the word „candidates‟ as synonymous with „students‟ and 
therefore wrote summaries not about citizens being rewarded for community work, but about students being
rewarded for excellent performance on exams. A number of students also exceeded the word limit by 
rewriting the passage, while others took ideas from different sections and mixed them to form a summary. 
Students‟ responses suggested that they needed more practice in summary writing: it is quite evident that 
they were unable to identify main ideas and paraphrase these ideas. 
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Question 2 and 3
The general performance on this section was below that of previous years. 
Question 2 tested the candidates‟ ability to respond to a passage taken from Earl Lovelace‟s Salt, featuring 
the experiences of a boy. Most students performed well in contextual questions, but produced weaker 
responses in questions which required synthesis and evaluation. For example, in 2(d) “To what does „it‟ 
refer in line 9 of paragraph 1?” Students gave erroneous responses (the sun; the cemetery) and were unable 
-16- 
to correctly identify „the town‟. Question 2(f) and 2(g), particularly the former “(What does the father think 
of the son in paragraph 3?”) also presented difficulties to students.
Question 3 tested the candidates‟ ability to respond to an argumentative passage from a newspaper article 
(„Carnival Survives‟) written by Caspar London. Again, questions which required assessments proved 
difficult. For instance, in 3(e) “What does the author imply by the words „whatever than means‟ in lines 14 
and 15?”, many students missed the sarcasm and responses quite literally that the author did not understand 
the expression. In this question, as in Question 2, many of the weaker candidates quoted large portions of 
the passage with the hope that these would provide the examiners with the correct answer. However, this 
strategy does not work. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
As usual, this section posed a major challenge to the majority of candidates. 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture featuring a man apparently jumping 
through the air or running. Question 5 asked candidate to write a story based on the sentence It was then 
that I remembered my mother‟s words “What you sow is what you reap”. Question 6 provided the words 
The spacecraft blasted off. Mars here we come! and asked candidates to describe the astronaut‟s journey 
and their landing on Mars. The most popular of these questions was Question 5 and the least popular was 
Question 6. Question 5 was satisfactorily interpreted, as was Question 4. In Question 6, students generally 
did not pay attention to key words: describe; journey; landing. 
Some of the weaknesses in this section that need special attention are: 
Grammatical problems (tense, use of pronouns, sentence structure)
Mere recounting of events with little or no attempt to make the story come alive through 
development of plot, characterization, appeal to the senses, effective selection of details. Poor 
paragraphing and ineffective use of dialogue. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
This section tested the candidates‟ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of 
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on the topic There is nothing wrong with 
children being subjected to hardships and being denied privileges in life; it will build character. Question 8 
required candidates to write an argument either supporting or opposing the statement Victims of violent 
crimes should be compensated by the relatives of the criminals. 
A significant percentage of the candidates did not attempt this section. Among those who did, virtually the 
same number did each of the questions, but Question 7 was not as poorly done as Question 8. Candidates 
had problems interpreting some important words and expressions in the topics for example, „privilege‟ and 
„hardship‟ (Q7); „compensate‟ and „victims‟ (Q8). These misinterpretations sometimes rendered their 
arguments invalid. Although most students who attempted the questions clearly had views on the topics, 
some had difficulty in effectively developing points to support their arguments. There was, however, 
evidence of attempts to expand, show cause and effect and employ persuasive techniques in the presentation 
of the essay. 
The better candidates selected relevant information and developed points clearly in support of the position 
taken. There were instances of logical development and appropriate reinforcement of the argument. Some 
candidates were able to clinch their arguments with an effective conclusion. 
There was a general weakness in expression and mechanics of writing. In weaker scripts there was a mere 
listing of points, under-developed thoughts and limited views. There was also evidence of misuse of 
prepositions, awkward syntax, sentence fragment, run-on sentences and neglect of appropriate punctuation, 
especially question marks. 
-17- 
General comments
Not enough students demonstrated competence in Area II (Expression). Poor expression was most obvious 
in Section 3 where students wrote phrases such as: 
It was graduation day and we receive medels for our achievements; 
The senter of my hair was balled 
They need freedom to associate with people to know their upstands and their downfalls 
When you are in your cells you are very board 
I laided on my bed and I decided to fall asleep 
One encouraging fact is that many students demonstrated competence in the use of quotation marks. Apart 
from this, punctuation was limited to full stops and commas. The concepts of paragraphing is ignored so 
often that it prompts the question as to whether this aspect of writing is overlooked by teachers. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
Copyright 2008 Caribbean Examinations Council® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2009 
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for most of the UNDERSTANDING COMPONENT of 
the examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the EXPRESSION 
COMPONENT as well as part of the Understanding (all of Section 2 and part of Question 1). 
 The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is as 
follows:- 
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in the two papers this year, and the three 
previous years is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
48.54 49.01 (RoR*) 41.86 56.44 
 (T&T*) 49.56 
 *Rest of Region 
 *Trinidad and Tobago
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 190*) for 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009 is as 
follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
79.14 77.94 (RoR*) 74.74 81.82 
 (T&T*) 78.58 
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
32.36 23.44 (RoR*) 26.24 27.92 
 (T&T*) 26.98 
PAPER 01
Multiple Choice
PAPER 02
Essay
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+ 40* = 30+ 76+ = 40%
Expression – 90* = 114+ 114+ = 60%
TOTAL 
*raw score
 46+
+ weighted score
144+ 190+ = 100%
* raw score+ computed score
- 3 -
Average performance (2007-2009) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below. 
2007 2008 2009
Section 1 
Summary skills
10.04 (30) 10.42 (30) (RoR)
8.78 (30) (T&T) 
10.69 (30)
Section 2 
Comprehension
15.45 (29) 8.84 (30) (RoR)
12.98 (30) (T&T)
11.13 (30)
Section 3 
Story Writing 
Description
13.62 (35) 
10.63 (35) 
13.29 (35) (RoR)
14.25 (35) (T&T)
11.23 (35) (RoR)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
13.27 (35)
13.30 (35) 
Section 4 
Argument
13.74 (35) 12.78 (35) (RoR)
13.13 (35) (T&T)
14.44 (35)
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that candidates are required to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and productive (expression). In the examination, these skills must be 
demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (full stops, commas, colons and semi￾colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, 
abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence 
structure and paragraphing.
Teachers should try to build on young people‟s love of text messaging and other interactive types of 
communication on the computer (e.g. e-mail, Facebook) to enhance their understanding of skills that are 
required in non-face-to-face communication, and have them adapt these skills to fit the kind of writing 
that is acceptable in this examination. 
No matter how frustrating it may be, teachers must continue to use all their resources to encourage 
students to read because it is only by reading consistently that students will become comfortable with the 
written word. Furthermore, it is only by writing consistently that students will learn to write well. Reading 
(on its own) will not make a child acquire the skills of writing – passive skills (e.g. reading) cannot 
automatically transform themselves into active skills (e.g. writing). 
- 4 -
Candidates should come to the examination with a well practised procedure for tackling each question. 
Candidates should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down 
points, doing a rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, 
in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. It is only through repeated 
practice beforehand that each student will come to some understanding of the best way to process a rough 
copy into a fair copy under examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting, making insertions and making 
additions to their work so that what they write is intelligible to the examiners. Candidates must also 
acquire the habit of numbering answers correctly and setting out their answers on the page in a way that 
the examiners can recognise them. Even though examiners are required to make a great effort to decipher 
every word that some candidates have written and to find all the pieces of an answer, candidates should 
never forget that it is their own responsibility to write their answers legibly and clearly. Unlike the 
situation in school where in most cases one teacher corrects a whole test paper, in the CXC examination 
each answer is corrected by a different examiner. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed 
the public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one‟s 
ability to perform in the world of work. It is almost a sure way to fail the English „A‟ examination by 
starting off believing that you already know English and all that you need is a little practice on one or two 
questions. This becomes even more critical for those who have to repeat the examination after failing to 
perform satisfactorily in it. 
Specific advice on the sections of Paper 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within 
the word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC 
examiners are instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by 
candidates to use their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters 
and policemen) and should be treated as such by teachers and students. In the case of business students 
who may be told that an executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case 
here – candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original and 
words that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself and 
not like a chopped-up version of another one. 
The passage to be summarised is usually taken from a newspaper or magazine which caters to the general 
public. In order to understand the passage, candidates must be familiar with English words and structures 
that educated people use in their general writing. In some cases a few words may not be familiar to a 
reader, but in those cases the reader will very likely be able to work out the meaning from the context. 
Candidates should therefore get into the habit of reading at least the editorial page in their local 
newspaper as well as letters to the editor. In addition, candidates should read one or two articles from 
magazines that cater to their age group: Caribbean magazines and even international magazines for the 
general public. In this way they will become better able to work out, among other things, unfamiliar 
words in context.
- 5 -
The examiners look first of all to see whether the word limit has been exceeded. They stop their reading 
at that point, disregarding all else. The examiners then look to see whether the candidate has understood 
and can clearly identify the main points in the passage and award marks accordingly. The examiners then 
assess whether the candidate has put those points together in an intelligible and logical manner using 
his/her own words and award marks accordingly. 
When candidates exceed the word limit, the marks may be reduced by as much as 20%. 
When candidates use only the words in the original passage, the marks are automatically reduced 
by 33%. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings or 
insert extraneous material. This is penalised. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt 
to mislead or deceive or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. Those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question, candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad 
strategy, one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates‟ 
responsibility to indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner‟s responsibility to select it out 
of a number of possibilities given by the candidate. 
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that candidates have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some 
questions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. Students should know how to select words or 
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question 
asks: if it requires „a word‟ or „a phrase‟, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an 
indication that the candidate does not know exactly what the answer is. 
In the preparation for Section 3, every candidate should have read the best story from preceding years in 
order to get a sense of what is required. (These „Best Stories‟ are available from CXC). These stories 
should not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not 
memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
Cheating is punished severely and can have serious consequences. 
Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better students tend to write stories that fall within or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that 
stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to 
create atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly 
behaving like reports, with weak language. Students should try to improve their own techniques of story 
writing, including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good 
stories written by Caribbean and other authors. 
- 6 -
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with 
the simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story￾telling based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate interesting 
class productions – for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked 
appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must 
be linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The 
interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. 
Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. 
visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of language to 
create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and 
setting. Although responses to this question have improved over the last three years, there are still too 
many candidates who are writing a story and not paying attention to the instructions given. 
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Students should pay attention to „tone‟ and 
„audience‟ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Students 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspapers as well 
as short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For 
some unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that 
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact 
is, however, that the questions are deliberately set to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiners‟ view or what they ought to say.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
Question 1 
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from a magazine 
article dealing with difficulties faced by the sugar industry in the English-speaking Caribbean and 
solutions proposed. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous 
prose in no more than 120 words. 
- 7 -
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:– 
Sugar remained the English-speaking Caribbean‟s premier export crop because of high prices and 
preferential treatment. 
Sugar has now become unviable since prices have declined because large global producers have 
entered the market. 
Sugar is important, however, because of its ecological impact and because it is a part of the life of 
a significant part of the population. 
 Caribbean economies have to change because of the WTO ruling. 
 Change will not be easy because it requires money, modernization and retraining. 
Following are three summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ but still 
give the critical information needed: 
(1) Although many Caribbean states have abandoned sugar, chiefly because of competition from 
bigger producers, it remains the most important export crop in the English-speaking countries 
supported as it is by high prices and preferential trading agreements with the UK and the EC. 
In Jamaica, sugar still provides the livelihood for many in almost every parish and is a major 
foreign exchange earner. It is also environmentally friendly. However, elsewhere price cuts ruled 
by the WTO have led to changes in the importance and nature of the sugar industry, including the 
end of production in some cases. The success of this transition will depend on several factors, 
including European support, investments for modernization and retraining some workers. (116 
words) 
(2) Although cane production was abandoned in some Caribbean countries, the industry has 
flourished in others because of high prices and preferential trading arrangements with Europe. 
In Jamaica, sugar plays a vital part in contributing foreign exchange, in preserving the natural 
environment by preventing soil erosion and in providing a haven for animals. Recently, however, 
some Caribbean sugar industries became less profitable as larger countries started to export 
sugar. In response to this, some Caribbean countries have diversified. Europe’s decision to cut its 
preferred price, as directed by the WTO, has led to new industries being established, but this kind 
of change is difficult since European support is required as well as re-training of personnel to do 
other jobs. (117 words) 
(3) Caribbean economies have to reorganize in response to changes in the market economy for 
sugar. This means modernizing the industry as well as re-training and re-deploying human 
resources into other areas. The situation is partly a result of a WTO ruling against preferential 
conditions offered to the Caribbean by Europe, and partly because of the advent to the market of 
large producers like Brazil and Australia. These factors have made sugar production in the 
region less viable.
Though some countries chose to stop producing sugar, the Caribbean cannot afford to abandon 
the industry entirely not only because significant parts of the population rely on it for a 
livelihood, but also because it is an essential part of the ecological landscape. (120 words) 
- 8 -
Performance on Question 1 this year was marginally better than last year‟s, though revealing the same 
strengths and weaknesses in candidates‟ answers. However, there were still too many candidates who did 
not understand what is required in a summary. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage verbatim, often because they were not quite sure 
of the meaning of a key word. Because the passage used Jamaica to show the continuing importance of 
the sugar industry in some places, some candidates concentrated almost their entire summary on Jamaica. 
Those candidates who tried to summarise by simply following the sequence of the passage (without 
reading the whole passage first and identifying the main points) reached the word limit when they were 
about two thirds in the passage and then simply disregarded the rest. This meant that they automatically 
lost marks for not identifying some of the main points and they lost marks for poor organisation of their 
summary. 
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated excellent comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to identify all the main points, omitting unnecessary details and 
repetitions, and they were able to put together the points in a coherent way, using their own language as 
far as possible . 
Suggestions for teachers and students
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
 (i) remind students to observe the stated length
 (ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done 
(iii) insist that students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
(iv) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills 
(comprehension and composition skills)
 (v) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using one‟s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
e) observing correct mechanics of the language 
- 9 -
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
Performance in this section was similar to last year‟s overall performance.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage from George Lamming‟s “Of 
thorns and thistles”. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set:
(a) She entered on tiptoe; she whispered 
(b) that there is tension; that there is conflict; a dramatic effect; an effect of give and take
(c) Her normal attitude was pleasant and agreeable.
(d) A tense or unpleasant atmosphere existed.
(e) She disapproved of it; she disliked it; it was outrageous and offensive
(f) She prepared herself to receive Rose; she was trying to calm herself; she shut herself off 
determined to ignore Rose; she wanted to appear to be asleep; she assumed a position of protest
(g) She was old and weak
(h) She had difficulty seeing. 
Most candidates found no difficulty answering (a), (e) and (g). In the case of (b), as is usually the case, 
whenever a question asks What effect does ..., there is a sharp separation of weaker students from stronger 
students. In the case of (c), a high percentage of candidates seemed not to be able to contrast the incident 
in the passage from what was „normal‟. It is clear that they expected a clue or the answer to be near the 
beginning of the passage and paid little attention to It was seldom that Angela displeased her, which 
occurred in the last paragraph. In the case of (d), it seemed as if the word atmosphere in this context 
posed a problem for many candidates or that they found difficulty finding an appropriate word to identify 
an atmosphere. (f) was probably the most testing of the questions in that it required candidates to 
formulate a conclusion about Mother Barton‟s posture based on what had happened before. This kind of 
task seemed to be beyond the reach of the majority of the candidates. In the case of (h), too many 
candidates found it difficult to understand that a summary answer was required rather than individual 
answers to each phrase given. 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage taken from a newspaper article 
“Impact of Criminal Aliens” written by Tony Best. The following were deemed to be the correct answers 
to the questions asked: 
(a) Undocumented immigrants and immigrants who commit crimes
(b) It gives the idea of something happening unexpectedly or without ceremony or that it comes as a 
shock. 
(c) It means one is refusing to deal with the problem of the effects on the Caribbean of the 
deportation of immigrants who commit crimes.
- 10 -
(d) It evokes or encourages one to have sympathy or empathy for the position of the United States. 
(e) It suggests that “friends” is not to be taken at face value, that it has another meaning; it is an 
example of sarcasm or irony.
(f) An example is “choirboys are not being shipped to the region”.
(g) Many of the deportees left the region as underage children and were sent back to the Caribbean 
as hardened adult criminals.
(h) He is suggesting that all parties concerned should sit down and work out a reasonable policy.
Performance on Question 3 was below that on Question 2. As is usually the case, answers, such as (a), (g) 
and (h), which are explicitly stated in the passage were answered satisfactorily by most candidates. As 
was the case in Question 2, the phrase What is the effect of ... in (b) posed a great problem for the vast 
majority of the candidates, added to the fact that the word jolted seemed to be unfamiliar to many of 
them. The same was the case in (d) where, in addition to the word effect, many candidates could not get 
beyond using the word understand to explain understandably. In the case of (c), candidates had to know 
the meaning of the saying and then apply it to the passage. This double task was beyond most of the 
weaker candidates. It was mostly the weaker candidates who had problems with (e) and ((f). 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to grasp implied meanings and not just 
explicit meaning, to make summary assessments and to express these accurately. Teachers should bear in 
mind that questions which require judgements and assessments will always occur on the examination 
paper, in Question 2 and Question 3, with the balance across the two questions differing from year to 
year.
The incidence of particular question types and ways of phrasing questions (e.g. What effect does ...) will 
vary according to the selections the examiners make to ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers 
should therefore familiarise themselves with all sections of the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to 
make sure that they provide practice for students in all the question types specified in the syllabus as well 
as the various ways of phrasing questions. 
Teachers should dissuade students from quoting whole sentences and even paragraphs in answer to a 
simple question. Unusually long answers immediately cause the examiners to think that the candidate 
does not really know the answer. In any case, any answer which provides two or more alternatives in the 
hope that the examiner will select the correct one will automatically be awarded zero marks. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a girl appeared to be reading 
a book to a boy. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the sentences The door was 
closed and the cobwebs in front of it suggested it had not been opened for a long time. Moor turned the 
key and pushed open the door. Question 6 (the descriptive essay) required candidates to describe the 
places along the route of a hike and the ways in which the weather affected the hike. 
- 11 -
Question 4 produced a variety of responses with some weaker candidates resorting to a description of the 
picture rather than concentrating on telling a story. However, most candidates were able to integrate the 
picture quite well into their story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 proved to be the most attractive question for most candidates since they could easily make a 
story from the scenario presented. Though some responses to this question had the stimulus quotation 
inserted without satisfactory integration into the plot, in most cases it was reasonably well done. 
In the case of Question 6, there was continuing improvement over previous years, indicating that 
candidates were better prepared to write a descriptive essay. It was also the case that the way in which the 
question was phrased allowed for more narrative into which candidates could fit their description. This 
year was the first time that performance on Question 6 exactly matched performance on Questions 4 and 
5. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their 
writing classes – how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story￾writing that might interest even reluctant writers. 
Over the years, candidates have used the story lines in films they have seen as the basis for their short 
stories. However, even though originality in story line is not an absolute requirement, candidates should 
not get into the habit of slavishly copying other people‟s material. It may result in the copied parts of 
stories being discredited. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. 
Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood 
and feelings. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing 
and proof reading. In preparing students for narrative writing, teachers should have students focus on 
sequence of events, verb tenses and adverbs and conjunctions of time.
For descriptive writing, students can be encouraged to imagine themselves using a camera and describing 
what they see through the lens as they move the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole 
scene. Students need to get accustomed to the concepts ‘spatial’, ‘temporal’, and ‘sensory’, and to 
understand how these approaches bring order and meaning to their work. Critical reflection on 
their own writing may also be achieved through the analysis of / comparison with a range of 
excellent to poor examples of description. While it is necessary for teachers to get students accustomed 
to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking adjectives and adverbs, 
students should be wary about memorising flowery phrases and sticking them, willy-nilly, into descriptive 
essays. In order to prepare students for descriptive writing, teachers have to focus specifically on 
vocabulary enrichment. One way is by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and 
another of adverbs, and getting students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific 
scenes. Teachers need to make these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
- 12 -
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
Questions 7 & 8
Question 7 asked candidates to write an essay giving their views on the statement Watching television, 
rather than reading, is the best way for children to broaden their knowledge. Question 8 asked candidates 
to present an argument either supporting or opposing the view that the government is wasting too much 
money buying school textbooks because the children are not reading them and that more money should be 
spent on computer equipment, which children prefer. 
Candidates did not demonstrate any significant difference in preference for the one or the other question. 
Performance in this section this year was significantly better than last year probably because the topics 
were very familiar and meaningful to most candidates. There was little difference in performance on the 
two questions. 
The good responses to Question 8 addressed both the matter of children‟s preference and the matter of the 
government investing money in the one or the other. The good responses to Question 7 addressed the 
advantages and disadvantages of both television and reading. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
In responding to arguments, whether in real life or in examination essays, it is necessary to address all 
aspects of the argument that are put forward; not answering a specific aspect suggests that you have a 
problem with that specific aspect. In any case, answers to arguments in examination essays have to be 
comprehensive since marks are assigned to the different parts of a question. In other words, if you omit
part of a question, you automatically lose marks assigned to it. 
While this section of the paper often gives topics which are of immediate interest to teenagers, students 
also need to keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interest. It is not always 
that topics close to the immediate and current experience of teenagers will be given in this section. 
Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially in the 
proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast 
and concession. Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, 
„accordingly‟ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as 
they often are. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2010
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright ©2010 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Paper 01, the multiple-choice paper, accounts for most of the Understanding component of the 
examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounts for all of the Expression 
component as well as part of the Understanding Component (all of Section 2 and part of Section 1). 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers 
is as follows: 
 PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL 
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression _ 90* = 114+
 114+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+
 114+
 190+
 = 100% 
 
* raw score 
+ weighted score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in January 2010 and in the two previous 
years is as follows: 
 
 2008 2009 2010 
 47.8 59.3 54.9 
The overall means for the examination (out of a total of 190) for the years 2008, 2009, 2010 are as 
follows: 
 2008 2009 2010 
 82.23 88.19 86.04 
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple-choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 
60 marks is as follows: 
 2008 2009 2010 
 26.41 27.31 24.44 
Average performance (2008–2010) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below: 
3 
Section 2008 2009 2010
Section A 
Summary Skills 11.51 14.15 11.13 (30) 
Section B 
Comprehension 6.82 8.60 10.11 (30) 
Section C 
Story Writing
Description
14.25 
12.21 
13.29 
10.24 
14.52 (35) 
13.70 (35) 
Section D 
Argument 13.52 13.55 13.77 (35) 
While candidates are encouraged to communicate in order to develop the facility to process and 
articulate ideas, there is a need for them to differentiate between the spoken language and that which 
is written, and to appreciate that Standard English has an international currency. CXC English A is an 
English Language examination and candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in, 
and control of the English Language. 
Preparation for the examination must be a gradual process of developing skills, both receptive 
(comprehension) and productive (expression), in the English language. In the examination, these 
skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks, not only full stops and 
commas, but also colons and semi-colons, as well as other conventions of writing, such as inverted 
commas, capitalization, abbreviations, the writing of numbers, whether in figures or in words, correct 
spelling, proper sentence structure, and paragraphing. Critical reading and thinking skills need also to 
be integral parts of the regular class sessions, because without these skills the tasks of summary
writing, comprehension, argument or discussion are not easily managed. 
Teachers should capitalize on the current interests of the candidates and use topical regional and 
international issues to help them appreciate the value of effective language use, and to help them to 
build personal banks of ideas. It is important to remember that very few candidates are natural 
speakers of Standard English and therefore every learning opportunity should be used. 
Managing the examination is an area for which candidates need to be prepared. Candidates should be 
given strategies for interpreting and responding to tasks; for preparing simple outlines to guide their 
construction of responses; and for effectively editing their work. They need well rehearsed 
procedures for tackling each question. Candidates should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure 
of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy, and producing a fair copy. This is 
especially important in writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing 
a cogent argument. It is only through repeated practice that each individual student will come to some 
understanding of the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy under examination 
conditions. The perception that the English Language examination is not an activity for which the 
candidate needs to prepare should be seriously rejected. 
4 
There are also some basic examination presentation strategies that candidates need to be reminded of: 
it is important to write so the work may be read; care should be taken in deleting and adding 
information. The use of liquid paper should be discouraged in favour of neat crossing out, since 
candidates frequently forget to insert new material in places where the liquid paper was used. 
Correct question numbering and page numbering help ensure that efforts are not misunderstood. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and the
general public regard performance in English Language examinations as a measure of one’s ability to 
perform in the world of work. It should also be remembered that the sort of English required in an 
examination is different from what is normally spoken in every-day life. Preparation for the English 
examination is just as important as it is for any other subject 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Section A - Understanding and Expression
Question 1
Most candidates showed some evidence of overall understanding of the passage to be summarized, 
grasped the concept that ‘infertile soil’ was responsible for the food crisis and in most cases 
demonstrated the ability to pull out two points from it. Several good scripts exhibited good language 
use. Too many candidates, however, still do not know what is required in summary writing. A large 
number of candidates experienced expression problems; hence, communication of their ideas was
ambiguous or even contradictory. In addition, there was often a lack of cohesion. 
 There were very few superior scripts, and candidates evidently experienced several problems 
getting beyond initial understanding of the passage: though they understood the general drift 
of the passage, they clearly had difficulty with the details, and the way those details 
developed and interacted with the main point and thrust of the writing. 
 The habit of lifting and regurgitating chunks from the passage, without analysing the content, 
continues to be a problem. Teachers need to focus more on the need for interpretation and re￾expression of the meaning of what is read — not just changing of words (interpreting rather 
than translation).
 Exceeding the word limit is still a problem. More practice is needed in the strategies of 
achieving economy in writing, in selection of points, and in achieving focus. 
 Organization is another major problem since many candidates show a lack of ability to link
points and ideas logically. Many candidates are limited to the chronology in the original. 
Following are three summaries of the passage which give some idea of different approaches to 
presenting the critical information. 
Sample Summary #1
Various factors contribute to the world’s food crisis. These include pests and diseases, flood and 
drought, poor farming practices, the decreasing amount of cultivable cropland, and, most importantly, 
the increasingly poor quality of soil. Successful attempts have been made to improve seed quality but 
this has limited effect where the soil is poor. Producing better types of plants increased food for a 
5 
short while but failed because of soil. The world food crisis is usually seen as a result of bad 
marketing practices, but other things like water, diseases and soil must not be taken for granted, as is 
usually the case. Attention has been given to improving agricultural practices, but very little is done 
to improve the soil. 
(120 words)
Sample Summary #2
Seeds are improving but food production is falling because soils are deteriorating and people are 
going hungry. According to scientists better varieties resulted in the ‘green evolution’. Many years 
ago, improved plant varieties resulted in the ‘green evolution’. This led to the belief that the crisis 
was over. The hope was short-lived as fertile soil, a critical factor, was lacking. The present food 
crisis, intensified by natural disasters and diseases, could have been averted with the promotion of 
fertilizers in places like Africa. Although they practice modern agricultural techniques, governments 
and charities are not interested in funding projects to improve the quality of soil. 
(105 words)
Sample Summary #3
Although the quality of seeds is improving, soil is getting worse and there is currently a food crisis. 
Soil improvement is critical to solving this crisis. 
While it is true that the crisis is viewed in economic terms, a combination of environmental conditions 
also contributes to creating the desperate food situation. The chief problem is that fertile soil is 
needed to capitalize on the high quality seeds and plants developed through modern scientific 
methods. Research in soil improvement has been neglected because it does not capture the interest of 
governments and charities. They fail to realize that even the best quality seeds cannot flourish without 
good soil. Soil health is needed to avert a worse food crisis. 
(117 words)
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Competence in the techniques of summary is required: a grasp of the thesis; identification of the main 
points; logical organization in which the correct relationships are grasped and expressed, the ability to 
express the material in one’s own words, with an appropriate vocabulary; and completion within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, this is
interpreted as incompetence. 
Summarizing is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters and policemen) and should be 
treated as such by teachers and candidates. In the case of business candidates who may be told that an 
executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case in English —
candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original, and 
words that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself 
and not like a chopped-up version of another one. 
The examiners first determine whether the word limit has been exceeded. Words beyond the word 
limit are not considered. Consideration is next given to whether the candidate has understood and can 
clearly identify the main points in the passage and award marks accordingly. The examiners then 
assess whether the candidate has put those points together in an intelligible and logical manner using 
his/her own words and award marks accordingly. When candidates exceed the word limit, the marks 
may be reduced by as many as twenty per cent; when candidates use only the words in the original 
passage, the marks are automatically reduced by 33 per cent. 
6 
Care must be taken to preserve the meaning of the original, and to avoid the inclusion of extraneous 
material, personal opinion and commentary. In real life, such distortion would be seen as being 
unethical, and it could lead to wrong, unfair and disastrous decisions. 
Section B - Understanding 
Questions 2 and 3
Generally, candidates found the questions in this section within their reach, but there were many 
instances of candidates aiming to succeed by including everything in the section of the passage to 
which the question directs them, when in fact they are required to be specific. There were varied 
weaknesses in answers, most exhibiting vagueness, and problems with expression. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates 
Answers indicate a need for teachers to help students to develop accuracy and control, for example by 
 engaging students in much practice in interpreting and arriving at meaning and 
evidence 
 involving students in practice to develop the habit of focusing and discriminating 
 involving students in activities that develop their vocabulary so as to produce answers 
that are clear and concise 
 engaging students in recognizing the difference between literal and metaphorical 
language. 
The questions in this section are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates 
should pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. Candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. Answers should be to 
the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which 
requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage usually results in zero 
being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidate’s responsibility to indicate clearly what the 
answer is; it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of possibilities given by 
the candidate. 
This section requires candidates to respond to different levels of meaning and to express their answers 
clearly. Candidates also need to do as each question asks: if it requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then 
providing a sentence, for example, is often an indication that the student does not know exactly what 
the answer is. 
Section C - Expression 
Questions 4, 5 and 6
Performance in Section III was generally consistent with past years. There were a few superior scripts 
and also a few incompetent ones. Most of these came from Question 6 (description), as candidates 
7 
continue to ignore the requirement to describe, or to describe the scene and/or period that the question 
asks for. 
Of the three choices given in this section, the most popular was no. 5, the word prompt, while the least 
popular was no. 4, the picture stimulus. 
Question 4 
 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture of a little girl hugging a boy. Both 
children were smiling. Many candidates were prompted to write expository pieces in response to this 
stimulus. 
Question 5 
This stimulus was very popular with candidates. It required them to write a story beginning with the 
sentences ‘He slammed the door behind him. He knew it would be for the last time.’ Performance was 
generally fair. 
Question 6 
Many responses suggested that candidates had not studied the instructions, and, as happened in earlier 
examinations, they wrote mainly narrative, with some description, from the start of the assignment, 
rather than focus on the specific time/place elements for description. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Candidates are advised that they should read the best story from preceding years in order to get a 
sense of what is required, but these stories should not be memorised and reproduced. In addition 
candidates should not disregard the word limit set; the longer the story, the greater the chance of 
grammatical and other errors occurring. Although the question papers state word limits as mainly 
approximations, the experience has been that the better candidates tend to write stories that fall within 
or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be 
rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to 
create atmosphere and mood, and good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, 
mostly behaving like reports, with weak language. Candidates should try to improve their own 
techniques of story writing, including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between 
characters, by studying good stories written by Caribbean and other authors. 
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times they use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, stilted, 
sometimes unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help candidates feel 
comfortable with the simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. 
Oral, spontaneous story-telling based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial 
statements could stimulate some interesting class productions – for listening, writing and peer 
interaction. 
Candidates continue to be unable to differentiate between exposition and description, or to create a 
piece in which the narrative overwhelms the descriptive. Although responses to this question have 
improved over the last three years, there are still too many candidates who are writing a story and not 
paying attention to the instructions given. 
8 
 Description must be clearly constructed and developed. (The different components must be 
detailed, then linked appropriately to create areas of focus; the relevant details must be 
logically and effectively sequenced; and then the different areas of focus and facets must be 
linked appropriately [e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail]).
 The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the descriptive 
elements. 
 Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute 
to the whole picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. 
 Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There 
should be varied and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as appropriate 
choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and setting. 
 Candidates should be encouraged to improve their facility with adjectives and adverbs. 
Section D - Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
The performance in this section was similar to that of earlier examinations but some areas of concern 
continue to be noted. 
Question 7 
This question required candidates to argue for or against the choice of local food. This was not a 
popular choice. While the subject was very topical candidates seemed not prepared to present 
arguments and comment on local foods. Arguments were often undeveloped, lacking illustrative 
details and comparison. 
Question 8 
This was by far the more popular and the better done question. It required candidates to give their 
views on the banning of sexual and violent songs from radio and television. It was topical and 
candidates were able to take a balanced approach to responding. They advanced counter arguments to 
show other areas of blame for behaviour beside sexual and violent songs. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Candidates need to note that skills of argument require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using 
good argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Candidates should pay attention to 
‘tone’ and ‘audience’ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they 
present. Candidates can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and 
editorials in newspapers as well as short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine 
section of newspapers.
9 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully and make sure they understand key words. They 
should then select their points, choose examples that support their points, and be consistent and clear 
in their presentation. Some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that 
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The 
fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of 
opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely 
agree with what they think is the examiners’ view or the socially acceptable view. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2010 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Copyright © 2010 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
– 2 –
GENERAL COMMENTS
The number of candidates writing the examination this year was approximately 100,000. 
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for most of the Understanding component of the examination 
overall, and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the Expression as well as part of the 
Understanding component (part of Question 1 and all of Questions 2 and 3).
The distribution of marks for the two profiles, Expression and Understanding, across the two papers is as 
follows: 
PAPER 01
Multiple Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression – 90* = 114+
 114+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+ 144+
 190+
 = 100% 
* raw score 
+
 weighted score 
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in the two papers this year, and the three 
previous years is as follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
49.01 (RoR*) 41.86 56.44 66.45 
 (T&T*) 49.56 
* Rest of Region 
* Trinidad and Tobago
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 190+
) for 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 is as 
follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
77.94 (RoR) 74.74 81.82 85.33 
 (T&T) 78.58 
Average performance (2007-2010) on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks is as 
follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
23.44 (RoR) 26.24 27.92 26.25 
(T&T) 26.98 
– 3 –
Average performance (2007–2010) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below. 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
Section A 10.04 (30) 10.42 (30) (RoR) 10.69 (30) 14.57 (30) 
Summary Skills 8.78 (30) (T&T) 
Section B 15.45 (29) 8.84 (30) (RoR) 11.13 (30) 9.07 (30) 
Comprehension 12.98 (30) (T&T)
Section C 
Story Writing 13.62 (35) 13.29 (35) (RoR) 13.27 (35) 13.67 (35)
Description 14.25 (35) (T&T)
10.63 (35) 11.23 (35) (RoR) 13.30 (35) 11.42 (35)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
Section D 13.74 (35) 12.78 (35) (RoR) 14.44 (35) 13.28 (35) 
Argument 13.13 (35) (T&T)
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was satisfactory, with approximately 72 per cent of candidates achieving 
acceptable grades. Paper 01 assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through word choice, grammar 
and punctuation as well as meaning constructed from reading literature and opinions expressed in various 
forms. Candidates performed best on items requiring understanding of literary discourse, but were weakest 
on understanding informative discourse, grammar and mechanics. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
The summary expected from candidates writing the CSEC English A examination is one demanding the 
skills used in every-day situations where what is said or what is written may need to be put into a concise 
form. The summary should reflect the general depth and intention of the original while giving all of the 
necessary information in candidates’ own words. There are various approaches to writing summary and 
teachers need to expose students to these. One may simply follow the organization of the original, moving 
chronologically through the points. Summary may also begin with the conclusion and then show the line of 
reasoning and facts. The important requirement is that the correct relationships between the points must be 
maintained, so that the meaning is unchanged and clear. Additionally, while it is not necessary to capture 
every detail, it is important that vital information is not ignored. A good vocabulary is an asset that should 
be cultivated, since a summary must be rendered in one’s own words. 
The responses to the summary question continue to suggest that many candidates are not being taught the 
skills of summary writing. There is persistent wholesale or partial lifting. In a large number of instances 
where the main points are grasped, the summaries fail because not enough attention is given to organization 
and meaning. Large numbers of candidates continue to have problems comprehending the passages set. 
This is directly related to the lack of comprehension skills generally. Poor vocabulary, poor understanding 
– 4 –
of grammar and punctuation, weak grasp of connotative language, and weak reasoning are among the 
elements contributing to misinterpretation. Section A tests two elements: understanding and expression, 
hence the importance of comprehension skills. Candidates must not see ‘comprehension’ as a textbook 
activity, but as an essential part of daily life. 
Often the skill of paraphrasing is confused with summarizing — paraphrasing will generally increase, rather 
than reduce the length, so that in such cases many of the main points come outside of the word limit. 
Question 1
The summary passage on cassava proved to be generally manageable, based on a topic of which most 
candidates have some knowledge. There was a general improvement in candidates’ performance in writing 
the summary, with more candidates demonstrating those skills needed to show competence. However, the 
general weaknesses continued, with such responses reflecting the same problems that have been identified in 
the past: lack of understanding of the passage, the use of extraneous information, use of the language of the 
text, and overall weakness in the use of language. This year, like other years, there were many instances 
where candidates wrote letters and stories about cassava preparation and use in their own homes. Not only 
did they misunderstand or ignore the instructions, but they indicated a serious inability to address what was
asked, without permitting what was known to interfere. In instances where it was obvious that candidates 
were attempting to write in their own words, vocabulary deficiency was a problem. 
Section B: Comprehension
In Section B, there are two kinds of texts, representing the literary and the expository genres. The questions 
require precise answers rather than the general or vague. Candidates should pay close attention to every 
word that is used in the textual piece (prose, poetry, drama) and recognize the various levels of meaning. Of 
importance too, is the fact that questions are asked in various ways. Teachers need to ensure that in 
preparing students, they use the taxonomy to help them to become familiar with types of question words and 
meaning. In response to each question, candidates are expected to answer precisely what they are asked. 
These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which requires a specific 
answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, one which usually results in zero 
being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates’ responsibility to indicate clearly what the answer is; 
it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of possibilities given by the candidate.
Questions 2 and 3
Most candidates performed fairly well on this section, with Question 2 being the one with which candidates 
were more comfortable. Question 3 appeared to be more demanding. 
Questions that candidates found most challenging were 2(d), 3(c), 3(f), 3(g), and 3(h). All these questions 
required making judgements rather than lifting answers from the passage. Question 2(d) required the 
candidates not to simply list the occupations, or choose one, but to decide on the main occupation; Question 
3(c) required them to decide on not why ‘gut’ feeling has to be developed, but why it has to be ‘deliberately
developed’; 3(f) presented problems to candidates who simply lifted from the passage; 3(g) was a test of 
ability to derive the meaning of an unfamiliar word from its context; 3(h) required the ability to arrive at 
overall meaning and the writer’s intention in a passage. 
Section C: Story Writing 
It is recognized that candidates seem to read less than before, with each year-group reading less than the one 
before it. One reality is that the adult world supplies the student world with film, visual stories which reduce 
the need to read for pleasure or entertainment, and sometimes even for knowledge — there is no need to 
imagine, since the visual preempts this activity. However, the movie concretizes a story: there is character, 
setting, theme, conflict, climax; there are details, moods and tones. The movie gives opportunity for 
critique: what worked, why it did, where the situation was unrealistic, where and how could things have 
been improved? What would a sequel contain: what other perspectives are possible? What would you write 
– 5 –
if you wanted to convey the beauty, emotion or some other abstract aspect to someone who did not see the 
movie? Are the spoken words alone enough to help someone experience the power of the movie? This 
suggests that while we continue to persuade our candidates into reading, we need to accept their differences 
and make more use of their world to stimulate their minds and efforts. Different types of stimuli are 
provided in the examination for story writing — the more visual student is helped by a picture stimulus, but 
this kind of stimulus is not designed to exclude anyone. 
Candidates need to be encouraged to evaluate their own stories using a given set of criteria. The categories 
used in marking the examination are public. They are ‘incompetent’ including ranges 1 and 2, ‘competent’ 
including ranges 3 and 4, and ‘superior’, ranges 5 and 6. Teachers should help students to apply these 
categories in assessing their own efforts in the attempt to improve their skills. 
A negative practice clearly evidenced by candidates’ stories is that they prepare a story and are determined 
to write this story regardless of the stimuli given, or they tack the stimulus on to the final paragraph in the 
hope that it may be absorbed. In both instances, their responses are clearly incompetent, and assessed in this 
range. 
Questions 4 and 5
By far the more popular and better done was Question 5, but Question 4 was also attempted by many 
candidates. Overall, candidates continue to be poor to moderate in this section. The vast majority fell into 
the ‘competent’ group, mainly at the lower end of the mark scheme. There were only occasional 
exceptionally good scripts. The responses generally indicate weaknesses in story-writing techniques, as well 
as significant weaknesses in fundamental language competencies. 
Section C – Descriptive Writing
Comments made on Question 6 in previous years bear repeating here: description must be clearly 
constructed and developed, having the different components linked appropriately. Details must be logically 
and effectively sequenced. The different areas of focus must be linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. 
foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must 
be related to the purely descriptive elements. The choice of features to be described must be clearly 
motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be 
consistent within itself: any change in perspective (time, perspective, mood, tone) must be clearly 
established. There should be varied and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as 
appropriate choice of words (nouns, verbs, concrete adjectives, adverbs) to create setting and atmosphere. In 
short, the object should be to enable the audience to see and to vicariously experience what is being 
described.
Question 6
Question 6 continues to be the least popular in Section C. Where it was attempted, too much narrative was 
included in the response. Among the weak responses, the descriptions were merely a listing of details, with 
little sense of the spatial or the other elements that would make the description meaningful. 
It is clear that the question is not yet achieving, to a significant degree, the purpose for which it was 
introduced — to provide an option to the story-writing questions. Only the exceptional candidates appear to 
perform well on this question, which suggests that the writing of description is not being given enough 
attention in classrooms. 
Section D – Argument 
This section tests candidates’ expression skills: how they organize thoughts for maximum effect, moving 
smoothly from one idea to another; how to express those views clearly and succinctly; how to use supporting 
elements; the techniques of audience appeal; the skill of reasoning and the ability to recognize and separate 
opinion from fact are among the skills assessed. Topics will be related to current social issues and elements 
– 6 –
which appeal to or fall within the experience of the student, but the skills of reasoning, whether in arguing 
for, against, or in giving one’s reasoned views should be acquired by using as wide a range of stimuli as 
possible. Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially 
in the proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast 
and concession. Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by contrast’, 
‘accordingly’ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as 
they often are. 
Question 7
This question presented challenges with interpretation. ‘Obedience’ was sometimes defined culturally as 
‘[having] manners’, and a variety of other positives such as ‘trustworthiness’ and ‘submissiveness’. The 
examination is a test of candidates’ ability to use Standard English as an international currency. While the 
foregoing kind of answer is not completely ‘wrong’, is it at best only a partial satisfaction of the appropriate 
task.
Question 8
The topic, ‘Sexual and violent songs’ produced scripts that never lacked content; candidates who attempted 
this question had much to write, so they did well in Area 1, but many experienced problems with Area 2. 
The topic ‘Caribbean doctors’ produced fairly good responses and some of the arguments were very good. 
Candidates made many interesting points and showed good language control. 
Recommendations for Teachers
Teachers should:
 Help candidates to see the relevance of the various areas of study to the immediate and future 
quality of their lives. 
 Teach for and encourage transfer of knowledge and skills. 
 Encourage candidates to see and respect the differences in the language varieties they speak and 
hear. 
 Help candidates to understand the need, on the one hand, for Standard English mastery as their 
international currency, and on the other, the value of their own dialect in identifying with the local 
and regional space.
 Facilitate and encourage reading by using various strategies: teach English Language through 
English Literature or other study texts. 
 Not teach for the examination but teach strategies for tackling the examination — the skill of 
outlining to improve organization and succinctness; the allocation of time; how to make corrections; 
the importance of correct numbering and how to interpret questions are some examples.
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2011 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The examination in January 2011 followed the same format as in previous years. Paper 01 — the 
multiple-choice paper — tested the Understanding profile, and Paper 02 — the free response 
paper — tested both the Understanding and Expression profiles. 
Performance remained stable in January 2011. Fifty-four per cent of candidates achieved Grades 
I–III. This was consistent with overall performance in January 2010 when the percentage of 
candidates who achieved this level stood at 55 per cent. The percentage of candidates at the 
Grade I level increased to 9.13 in 2011 from 7.08 in 2010, and 7.7 in 2009. There was significant 
improvement in the performance on Profile I — Understanding, and a more modest improvement 
on Profile II — Expression. 
Most students produced scripts that fell within the levels of suggesting or demonstrating 
competence. There were only a few superior scripts at one end, and also a few incompetent 
scripts at the other. This seems to indicate a need for teaching to focus more on improving the 
quality of students' general understanding and writing skills. 
This target can be achieved through careful reading and critical thinking that leads to the 
synthesis of ideas, and more exposure to a wide range of topics that allows for garnering ideas 
and information for further use. The goal should be to widen the students‘ experiences with good 
models. 
Equal focus must be placed on both what is written and how it is written. The latter goes beyond 
the mechanics of writing in terms of correct use of grammar to also include greater focus on
choice of words, tone and perspective or writer's stance. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was good, with approximately 79 per cent of candidates achieving 
Grades I and II. The mean on this paper was 30.57 out of a weighted total of 46. Paper 01 
assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through word choice, grammar and punctuation as 
well as meaning constructed from reading literature, informational text and opinions expressed in 
various forms. Candidates performed best on items requiring understanding of literary discourse. 
Retrieving explicitly stated information and ideas, and making straight forward inferences were 
well done. 
3 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1
This question requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and reproduce its meaning 
concisely and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak responses 
indicate usually major problems with understanding the passage, and with the ability to express 
meaning in the candidate‘s own words (synthesis). Many candidates try to succeed by lifting 
chunks or ‗cutting and pasting‘ them together in ways that indicate attempts to hide the fact that 
they are reproducing the words of the passage. Teaching should concentrate on helping students 
to grasp and reproduce meaning. Exercises in equivalent sentences are useful, and can be 
extended beyond one sentence to a paragraph, and further. Practice in comprehension that 
involves interpretation (not just re-wording) — executed both orally and in writing, is likely to 
be also very useful. 
Summarizing involves two major processes: information gathering (reading, identifying and 
interpreting what is relevant) and information giving (synthesizing, organizing and writing). 
Teaching must move beyond 'identifying points' to include understanding how the text is 
organized. Focusing on text organizational patterns such as cause and effect, problems and 
solution, before and after, and similar developmental strategies can lead students to greater 
comprehension and synthesis of information before they begin to write. 
The summary question is awarded a total of 30 marks, evenly distributed among three areas: 
 Understanding (Content) 
 Organization 
 Expression 
The text in January consisted of information with which most candidates would be familiar, and 
their answers generally indicated that they understood the contents. It is in this area —
understanding — that candidates continue to score well. Generally the instruction to write in 
continuous prose is observed. However, two problems persist. One of these is the practice of 
lifting the language of the text, apart from the permitted use of technical expressions. It now 
seems to be the norm to ignore the instruction to express the meaning as far as possible in your 
own words. The second is the continued ignoring of the prescribed length by a high percentage 
of candidates, despite repeated warnings that marks will be lost. Any points coming after the 
4 
word limit of 120 words are not rewarded. In fact, the need to go over the limit suggests that 
candidates are not as capable as they might be in organizing their thoughts, so they can also 
expect a lower mark under Organization. Satisfactory answers to this question 
- identified the theme/subject, and the thesis or general thrust of the discussion 
- located the specific issue and the reasons for focusing on this issue 
- identified the causes of the problem (general and specific) 
- examined specific areas by definition, recognition of causes and effects 
- described the outlook for the future and the reasons for those views. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- While students MUST use their own words, ―in your own words‖ does not require 
avoidance of key words of the passage. The technical jargon (scientific terms, 
specialized vocabulary) of some passages cannot be avoided when students are 
writing summaries. 
- Students need to undertake extensive practice in organizing their answers, using 
transition words to help the reader with understanding and readability and using 
simple, correct language. 
- Students should be reminded that to reuse the words of the passage entirely (whether 
as a whole chunk or by joining phrases from all over) attracts no marks — as the 
student has not presented any of his/her own words for assessment. Staying within 
the word limit is another area for practice. 
- Engage students in more close-reading exercises — paying closer attention to writer's 
intention. 
- The internal structure of the passage should be emphasized and organizational 
patterns reinforced so that students understand the importance of cohesion and 
coherence. 
- Emphasize the teaching of paragraph cohesion and the use of appropriate transitions 
and connectives. 
- Build vocabulary and spelling skills to help with comprehension. 
5 
- Students should be taught the critical elements for superior organization and 
language: transitional phrases and the value to achieving economy; using appropriate 
transitions; avoiding arbitrary use. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Questions 2 and 3
Candidates demonstrated knowledge of the requirements of Questions (a) to (d) which largely 
required recalling information explicitly stated in the passages. It was evident that most 
respondents had a good understanding of what the extracts were about and therefore could give 
correct responses to the questions that did not test higher-order skills involving evaluating or
synthesizing information. Evaluating content, language and textual elements proved difficult in 
some instances. 
 
The individual parts that proved challenging for Question 3 were (e), (f), (g) and (h). While 
candidates understood the nature of the questions, they struggled to analyse and synthesize the 
information and to link it to the writers' overall meaning. Question (h) in particular proved most 
difficult for candidates. This required them to draw a conclusion from the last three sentences of 
the passage. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- The teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined with the teaching of summary 
writing as both require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
- Students should be helped to be more focused on interpretation, more discriminating in their 
answers; more concerned with answering what is asked, not what is usually asked. 
- As with Section A, much practice is advised in reading, listening, and reproducing meaning; 
in interpreting meaning at different levels; and in paying attention to accuracy. 
- Practice in vocabulary building that involves not lists of words, but discerning meaning in 
context, is advised; practice in producing and responding to varied plausible responses helps 
students to ‗see‘ how writing may be interpreted, but there should also be insistence on 
accuracy in cases where some answers are not plausible responses to a stimulus or not 
supported by the passage. 
6 
- Developing sensitivity to how words and sentences work in the language is important, so that 
students rise above the level of seeing comprehension as guesswork or ‗anything goes‘. 
Section C: Story Writing and Descriptive Essay 
Question 4
The picture stimulus was well interpreted by candidates. It evoked various scenes and events 
involving the character in the picture. The facial expression was often interpreted as grief, pain, 
loss or some suffering that the character experienced. 
Question 5
The stimulus on which candidates were to base their story was ―Kenia considered the plan she 
had made. She looked around sadly, then nodded. It was the best decision‖. Most responses were 
pre-occupied with rape/sex and the abuse of teenagers by family members. The tales often lost 
sight of the stimulus, which was not effectively used. Candidates had difficulty integrating the
stimulus into their narratives, so that most often it was 'tacked on' at the end. 
Question 6
Candidates were required to describe the scenes and atmosphere in a stadium based on the 
stimulus ―The huge crowd rose to its feet as the athletes entered the stadium‖. Candidates were 
able to relate to the activities and events in a stadium. Most were often able to (though not in 
great detail) describe the ‗atmosphere‘ and ‗scenes‘, and very often successfully appealed to the 
readers' senses. 
Generally, the question continues to pose challenges for candidates who have not mastered the 
writing of a descriptive essay. Their responses fall into the realm of the narrative which is the 
genre of writing tested in Questions 4 and 5. There were some instances of misinterpretation of 
the 'time frame' of incidents/events/scenes. In some instances, there was no focus on the athletes. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- While there were some highly competent and superior scripts in response to Question 6, most 
scripts continue to be unsatisfactory mostly because students ignore the rubric. 
- Students need to be taught how to write a descriptive essay, and to recognize (not simply told 
or shown) differences between it and a story. One way in which this can be done is by an 
7 
immersion strategy involving reading and writing descriptive essays, and similar immersion 
in stories, some of which will involve description, but are not simply descriptive essays. 
- A descriptive essay allows for creativity in the same way the story does. Candidates may 
impose their own interpretation (so long as it is valid), and create their own scenes based on 
valid interpretation of the subject. Within the scene they can create different elements or 
aspects. 
- Teachers are advised to treat the writing of description as a writing experience into which 
they put in as much preparation as they do for story writing — and encourage every student 
to write a number of descriptive essays until they know how to do them. This is more 
advisable than the practice of preparing students for stories only, thus closing an option that 
they might well have found interesting and suited to their interests and abilities. 
- A danger in teaching ‗story‘ only is that the stimulus set in the exam may not appeal strongly 
to a particular student and so may only evoke a mediocre response. Full exposure and 
teaching give the students a fair chance to do well. 
 
Section D: Persuasive Writing 
More candidates did Question 7 which required them to give their views on the need for special
institutions for bullies, than Question 8 which required an argument for or against the testing of 
school students for HIV, with or without their parents‘ consent. 
Candidates were familiar with the subject of ‗bullying‘ in schools. Candidates spent most of the 
time dealing with bullying — the behaviour, the causes and the effects and sharing anecdotes 
from personal experiences. The focus should have been whether there should be an institution for 
those given to bullying. 
Candidates responded well to Question 8 whether they were supporting or opposing the view. 
The words ‗with or without consent‘ used in the question posed a challenge for some candidates. 
Many candidates did not establish a clear position in their line of argument. 
Suggestions for Teachers in Addressing Weaknesses 
 
- Strategies such as listening to and presenting arguments followed by peer critiquing of 
arguments are usually useful. 
8 
- The writing and presentation of papers and speeches are also useful, as are debates, advice 
corners, improvised situations such as talk-shows, and other means of promoting thoughtful 
speech and writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2011 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance this year was fair and compares favourably with the previous two years. The 
percentage of candidates who achieved Grades I−III was 67 compared with 66 in 2010 and 56 in 
2009. The overall mean was 88 compared with 85 in 2010 and 82 in 2009. Generally, the 
incidence of students being wholly unprepared for the examination was small, so that answers 
suggesting or demonstrating incompetence were fewer. When the examination is taken as a whole, 
there is some improvement, but individual questions reveal fluctuations in the quality of 
performance. 
While candidates seem to be taught the aspects of the syllabus which are examined, some 
candidates do not demonstrate the quality of skills that produce excellent responses. Most 
responses fall into the category of being adequate. There is strong evidence that questions/stimuli 
are not read carefully and not fully thought through. This results in many misinterpretations and 
inadequate responses. 
The following examples are indicative of this. Section D this year included a stimulus that required 
students to express their views on the issue of banning the import of fruits and vegetables, in order 
to support local agriculture. Attention was drawn to a response which replaced the word import
with export, used the word repeatedly and with confidence throughout the essay, and so missed the 
issue entirely. Equally concerning was the inclination of some candidates, in responding to 
Question 5 in Section C, to choose one of the indeterminate objects in the background of the 
picture and to make the story revolve around that, rather than around anything that was 
foregrounded. 
There are still instances of candidates answering more than one question. Not only is this a poor 
examination strategy, since it takes time away from other questions, but it suggests that candidates 
do not take care to read or study the instructions. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 — Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. The mean mark on this paper was 30 out of 46 
compared with 26 in 2010 and 28 in 2009. Candidates generally performed well on items of word 
choice, grammar and mechanics and on comprehension passages based on informative, literary and 
persuasive discourse. Items presenting difficulty were those requiring evaluation of the 
effectiveness of language devices such as irony, innuendo and symbolism as well as evaluating 
appropriate use of code and style in relation to the author’s intention. 
Paper 02 — Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1
This question required candidates to demonstrate both understanding and expression skills. The 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific 
discussions, analyses). The skills of selection and concise expression are targeted. Included in the 
- 3 -
syllabus is the following advice: Summaries require economy of language, the careful selection of 
the relevant main ideas, and the preservation of the intention of the original.
While most candidates managed to select the appropriate information for their answers, of that 
group, only a small minority showed mastery of the skill of writing clearly and concisely, in their
own words. Fewer candidates still, were able to maintain the correct relationships while 
reorganizing their points for brevity. They clung steadfastly to both the pattern and the language of 
the original, a strategy that often worked against conciseness. Most candidates continued to lift the 
points entirely. Often, connectives were not used so cohesion was lost. There were extreme cases 
where candidates’ concept of summary was to simply copy the first 120 words of the passage. 
The mean for the summary this year was 14 out of 30 compared with 15 in 2010 and 11 in 2009. 
The passage this year appears to have been well within candidates’ reach, and they scored 
reasonably well in the content area. Following the original organization slavishly, led to answers 
that exceeded the limit and so candidates lost marks. Failure to use their own language also earned 
low marks. Those candidates who performed in the range 9 –18 selected relevant details but 
generally did not maintain the original focus. 
A close look at the syllabus section Notes and Suggested Activities (specifically pages 6 –12) will 
help both teacher and student to identify and hone summary skills. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Section B is designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one 
expository. The skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) 
(pages 2–3). Weaker candidates responded well mainly to the first three of the ten objectives under 
(b) – recognizing facts stated explicitly, extracting specific and implied information. 
Question 2
The literary passage dealt with a children’s activity, hide-and-seek. The mean mark on this 
question was 7 out of 15. Part (a) asked simply for the name of the game. Examiners recognized 
that the game was called differently in the various countries, and these names were accepted. 
Part (c), which required deducing meaning, was frequently incorrectly answered as candidates were 
unable to go beyond the literal and repeated the answer for the previous question. The parts most 
answered incorrectly or omitted were (e), (f), (g) and (i). In (g), it was not recognized that a 
conflict must involve at least two elements. Similarly candidates failed to capture two sides of the 
oxymoron in (i). Questions relating to appropriateness of tone, connotative meaning and writer’s 
craft were not well answered. 
Question 3 
The mean mark for this question was also 7 out of 15. 
The problem parts were (f) where there was an inability to draw the inference, and (h) where again 
there was an inability to grasp and explain the oxymoron. It was noted that fewer candidates 
attempted to lift segments of the passage and tried to answer every question; there were fewer 
instances of no response. 
- 4 -
Candidates continue to ignore the use of the term phrase, and give instead full sentences or even 
paragraphs, and so lose marks. This prompts the reiteration of the need to teach students to study 
the requirements of individual questions. 
Section C: Story Writing 
This year, Question 4 was the most popular. Question 6 was the least popular in this section. The 
stories demonstrated generally that competence in writing standard English is weak. 
Question 4
This question used a picture of an elderly man playing a guitar as a stimulus. Candidates seemed 
generally comfortable with the picture stimulus. It prompted stories with good characterization and 
emotional involvement. Story lines tended to be similar, but those scoring the higher marks 
managed to create conflict or relationships with grandchildren, and tended to use symbolism. 
Reflection and flash back techniques were also attempted. The mean mark was 13 out of 35. 
Question 5 
This question was better handled. It was based on the stimulus A cold hand grasped his wrist as he 
slumped to the ground. Many candidates made unconvincing use of the stimulus often tacking it 
on to the end or barely including it in the story. The mean mark was 15 out of 35. 
Question 6 
This question was a challenge largely because candidates seemed unfamiliar with the word 
pedestrian. The question was based on the stimulus The streets were filled with pedestrians in 
anticipation of their new leader. Another challenge was also the need to describe mood and 
atmosphere, so that a significant number of answers scored between 10 and 13 marks. This year 
saw some resurgence of the tendency towards narration rather than description. At the same time, 
those candidates who understood the requirements wrote very good pieces. The mean mark for this 
question was 12 out of 35. 
Section D: Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
Both of these questions should have been quite suitable given the demands of the syllabus. The 
content required to respond to them should have been sufficiently within candidates’ experience. 
Question 7 required candidates to write an essay giving their views on the topic The government 
should ban the importation of all fruits and vegetables in support of local production. Question 8 
required an argument supporting or opposing the view that Hungry students cannot learn. Free 
lunch should be provided for all secondary school students.
Each question was structured in such a way that there were two parts to be linked to produce an 
acceptable response. This presented a major difficulty for large numbers of candidates who failed 
to create necessary links between the two parts; for example, candidates might argue hungry 
students cannot learn OR free lunch should be provided. 
Some of the responses were quite long − in several cases two or three pages, well over the word
limit. In addition, many candidates had ideas but did not have the language skills necessary to 
- 5 -
articulate those ideas well. The mean mark for Questions 7 and 8 were 16 and 14 out of 35, 
respectively. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
• It is clear that hundreds of students across the Caribbean have not mastered the use of 
Standard English. There continues to be interference from dialects and patois used 
throughout the region; to these have been added the slangs originating from dancehall music 
and the North American ghettos and the abbreviations familiar to users of the messaging 
media of modern technology. For students who almost abhor reading, some methods must 
be found to encourage correct use of the language. 
• Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when 
summarizing and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their 
responses into a coherent whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to introduce 
these words into the active vocabulary of students. Practice in construction shifts and 
equivalent sentences would be useful. 
• The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
• Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and in attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words 
and sentences work in the language is important. 
• Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through regular reading of good 
literature. This includes attention to paragraphing, grammar, spelling, diction and other 
conventions of writing. 
• Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story￾writing and descriptive writing. 
• Greater use should be made of literature to teach writing−immersion into how stories work. 
• Strategies should be engaged to provide individual help to students so that personal needs 
can be addressed. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2012 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance in the January examination was moderate. Most candidates produced competent scripts. 
Very few superior scripts were in evidence, and, at the other end, there was no startling number of 
incompetent scripts. What the examination results suggest, particularly through the questions which call 
for reading and understanding, is that most candidates‘ reading is superficial. As a result, candidates miss 
what is being asked when they need to study and respond to questions. Research has established that poor 
reading and comprehension skills lead to poor writing skills. There is much need for teaching to focus 
more on improving the quality of students‘ general understanding and writing skills. 
This target can be achieved through encouraging discussion, interactive reading where students are taught 
how to question what they read and to let themselves feel free to interpret or reinterpret the texts, more 
exposure to a wide range of topics and styles of writing, that allows the garnering of ideas and 
information for further use — in short, seek to widen the students‘ experiences with good models. Equal 
focus must be placed on what is written and how it is written. All of this is even more crucial since in our 
technologically advanced environment and instant solutions, our students are encouraged to be very 
visual. There is no need, or time, to imagine; they are accustomed to being given the interpretations. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. Seventy-six per cent of candidates achieved scores at the level 
of Grades I-III. The mean score for the paper was 26 out of a weighted total of 46. Candidates performed 
fairly well on Questions 1–20 which assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through grammar and 
mechanics. Questions 21–28 assessed understanding of literary text, sampled by a poem and candidates 
showed good understanding of the details of the poem, as well as the tone of the poet. Performance on 
the narrative passage was also good while on the expository passage, performance was fair. Candidates 
were generally able to recognize cause and effect, identify main ideas and draw conclusions. The weakest 
performance was noted on Questions 43–60 which assessed understanding of persuasive text. Candidates 
were unable in instances to distinguish fact from opinion and to identify language devices used by the 
writer.
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1 
This question requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and reproduce its meaning concisely 
and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak scripts usually indicate 
major problems with understanding of the passage, and with ability to express meaning in the candidate‘s 
own words (synthesis). The summary question is awarded total marks of 30, evenly distributed under 
three headings: Understanding (Content), Organization, and Expression. Generally, candidates did not 
show any great difficulty in responding to this question, particularly in understanding the content. 
However, weak responses indicated a lack of the basic skills of summary writing — using one’s own 
words without changing the meaning of the passage. ‗Lifting‘, as the examiners term the partial or 
wholesale use of words of the passage, is therefore common. This is a major difficulty, and one which 
causes candidates to lose considerable marks under Expression. Some candidates attempt to use their own 
words, but are seriously handicapped by poor vocabulary. 
3 
Particular effort needs to be taken to teach strategies for organization. Most candidates choose to follow 
the order of the original text, and this often prevents them from achieving a shorter piece of writing. It is 
most important that students be taught to recognize the relationship and the links between the main ideas 
in the passage, so that they are not tied to copying the movement of the passage. 
Candidates continue to ignore word limits, provide irrelevant details, unnecessary examples, and present 
information that was not provided in the passage. A major tendency is to write in short paragraphs. It is 
necessary to remind candidates that the summary has no single topic sentence, and should really be a 
paragraph which pulls together the essence of several paragraphs. There is a rich section on the kind of 
activities that can foster the necessary summary skills included in the English A syllabus. 
The passage set for January 2012 dealt with our dependence on fossil fuel, oil. The summary expected 
should have included: 
- The disadvantages of dependency on oil 
- The advantages offered by renewable energy 
- The challenges to be faced if renewable energy sources are to be successfully used. 
Below are examples of summaries that could illustrate what was expected of candidates. 
Sample Summary No. 1 
The high price of oil has caused us to look for alternative sources of energy, which can be produced at a 
lower cost and are now environmentally friendly. Using renewable energy sources, which are resources 
that never run out, offers many advantages. They are usually indigenous to a country and so reduce the 
need for foreign exchange, do not pollute the environment, have a multitude of applications and can be 
accessed anywhere. However, the cost of implementing the use of renewable energy is very high. To 
successfully develop its production and use, large investments are needed. There must be policies that 
provide incentives, such as reducing import duties and selling excess electricity. 
Sample Summary No. 2 
The world is dependent on oil which is a non-renewable resource. We suffer because oil producing 
countries often raise the price, and our fuel costs also rise. In addition, oil production is not 
environmentally friendly. Developing renewable energy offers advantages. Since it comes in several 
forms, a variety of ways of producing it is possible, even in remote places. It costs less than oil, is more 
environmentally friendly and saves foreign exchange as there is no need to import. Developing 
renewable energy, however, is difficult. It demands much capital investment. Policies that help by 
creating incentives to invest, produce and use renewable energy, are also needed. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Questions 2 and 3 
There were two types of passages used in this section — the literary and the expository. What was seen 
was a marked difference in the performance of candidates on Question 2 and 3. The inclusion of literary 
questions and the interpretation of the writer‘s style in Question 3 proved to be difficult for many 
candidates. 
4 
Candidates' Performance on Question 2 
The passage was taken from Harriet’s Daughter, a former English B text. It addressed the narrator‘s 
mixed feelings towards her father who, in her opinion, is disdainful of his Black heritage. Fifteen marks 
were allocated to a total of eight questions on the passage, one question being subdivided into two parts.
The language of the passage was appropriate for this academic level.
Candidates were able to identify the occupation (a) and views (b) (i) of the narrator‘s father and were also 
able to recognize irony (c) and sarcasm (f). Questions which required candidates to identify and 
understand attitude (b) (ii) and feelings (g) were not well answered. Similarly, although they were able to 
correctly select an expression showing sarcasm, candidates were unable to use the context of the passage 
to arrive at the meaning of the sarcastic phrase ―he’s so concerned about being coloured…‖
It was commendable that most candidates attempted even those questions (e), (g) (h) which apparently 
were challenging to them. Teachers should continue to encourage such efforts. With regard to developing 
higher level skills of comprehension, regular class and group discussions on appropriate passages will 
help students not only to identify, but to understand and articulate attitudes, feelings and tone. 
Candidates' Performance on Question 3 
Generally, candidates appeared to understand the passage, but they struggled to analyse and synthesize 
the responses and linked them to the writers' overall meaning. The mean on this question was 6 out of 15 
marks. Weaker candidates had difficulty on Parts (c), (e), (f) (g). In Part (c), although the answer 
appeared clearly in the second line of paragraph two, candidates tended to use peripheral information. 
The term ‗bedrock‘ in Part (f) should have been understood from the context in the passage, but proved to 
be a hurdle for many; and question (g) saw many candidates either misinterpreting the question, or 
attempting to answer by lifting the entire statement containing the words used in the statement. 
Recommendations for Teachers
Here last January‘s comments bear reiteration, the teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined 
with the teaching of summary writing as both require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
Summary writing goes another step, but understanding is the primary stage. It is suggested that students 
be helped to be more focused on interpretation; to be more discriminating in their answers; and to 
recognize what is asked, not what is usually asked. Benefits can be had from practice in vocabulary 
building that involves not lists of words, but discerning meaning in context; practice in producing and 
responding to varied plausible responses helps students to ―see‖ how writing may be interpreted. There 
should also be insistence on accuracy in cases where some answers are not plausible responses to a 
stimulus or supported by the passage. Developing sensitivity to how words and sentences work in the 
language is important, so that students rise above the level of seeing comprehension as guesswork or 
‗anything goes‘. 
Section C: Story Writing and Descriptive Essay 
There was a noticeable increase in the number of candidates who wrote on topics that were not given on 
the examination paper. Although some responses demonstrated competence in English, the candidates 
failed to score because they did not use the stimulus. Most scripts fell within the range of suggesting 
competence to low levels of demonstrating competence. 
5 
Question 4 
The mean on this question was 12 out of a total of 35 marks. The picture stimulus was not well 
interpreted. In some instances candidates did not focus their writing sufficiently on the foreground of the 
picture to develop their stories. 
 
Question 5 
This question required a response to the following stimulus: ―Martine and Sam huddled in the scanty 
shelter, looked back at what was left of their house and wondered what to do next.‖ Write a story which 
includes these words. While their language was competent, many candidates failed to answer the 
question. The mean on the question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
Question 6 
Generally, this question continues to pose challenges for candidates who have not mastered the writing of 
a descriptive essay. As in the past, most responses continue to use narrative as the vehicle for description. 
However, techniques such as moving in an orderly fashion over the scene, of widening or narrowing the 
view, are being used more than before, which is an encouraging feature. More work needs to be done on 
encouraging students to let characters contemplate, internalize, and reflect on the scenes suggested, so as 
to include feelings and reactions in the response to the task. The mean on the question was 13 out of 35 
marks. 
Section D: Persuasive Writing
The topics were within candidates‘ scope of knowledge. Nevertheless, both topics were not fully argued
and explored from an informed position. Too few ‗tools of argument‘ were employed. Weak responses 
indicated a lack of a clear position on the topics.
Question 7 
Candidates were required to write an essay supporting the views of either of two speakers based on 
whether homework was a waste of time or a rewarding activity and necessary for success in life. This 
question was the more widely chosen of the two options. The mean was 13 out of 35 marks. In many 
instances, candidates merely stressed the idea that homework is good practice while largely ignoring the 
part of the question that asked about its relationship to success in life. There were a few candidates who 
disagreed, but were unable to give valid or meaningful reasons for their disagreement. 
Question 8 
Candidates were required to give their views on whether it should be mandatory for all secondary school 
students to participate in extra-curricular activities as a requirement for graduation. There were varied 
interpretations of ‗extra-curricular‘. Some candidates did not appear to fully understand the meaning of 
the expression. As was the case with Question 7, the last part of the question was largely ignored. Some 
candidates dealt with why it is good to participate in extracurricular activities, but did not make the 
connection with its requirement for graduation. The mean on the question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
6 
Suggestions for Teachers in Addressing Weaknesses 
Strategies such as listening to and presenting arguments followed by peer critiquing of arguments are 
usually useful. Writing and presentation of papers and speeches are also useful, as are debates, advice 
corners, improvised situations such as talk shows, and other means of promoting thoughtful speech and 
writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
®
EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2012 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS 
General performance this year declined when compared with the 2011 results. The percentage of candidates 
who achieved Grades IIII was 48 compared with 67 in 2011 and 66 in 2010. The overall mean was 77 
compared with 88 in 2011, and 85 in 2010. The incidence of candidates being apparently wholly 
unprepared for the examination was higher than that of May/June 201l. Answers suggesting or 
demonstrating incompetence were higher in specific sections. 
Generally, candidates appeared to have been taught the various aspects of the syllabus, but were unable to 
demonstrate the quality of skills that produce excellent responses. Most responses continue to fall into the 
category of being adequate. There remains strong indication that questions are not read carefully and not 
fully thought through, resulting in misinterpretation and inadequate responses. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 — Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was satisfactory. Candidates generally continue to perform well on items of word 
choice, grammar and mechanics and on comprehension passages based on informative and persuasive 
discourse, and less well on literary items. Items presenting difficulty were those requiring recognition and 
evaluation of language devices such as irony and symbolism, as well as evaluating the use of connotative 
language and the choice of style in relation to the author‘s intention. The mean on this paper was 55 per 
cent compared to 64 per cent in 2011 and 57 per cent in 2010. 
Paper 02 — Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1 
This question required candidates to demonstrate skills in understanding, organization and expression. The 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific discussions, 
analyses) suitable to the secondary school age-group. The skills of selection and concise expression are 
targeted. The specific objectives are detailed in the syllabus under Understanding (a) and (b) and Expression 
(a), (b), (c). Included in the syllabus is the following advice: Summaries require economy of language, the 
careful selection of the relevant main ideas, and the preservation of the intention of the original (page 11).
The passage selected for May/June 2012 was considered to be well within the reading abilities of candidates. 
It was taken from a magazine article and required that candidate summarize a person‘s reflection on a very 
topical matter. The content focused on the nature of modern living, its negative consequences, and possible 
ways to avoid such consequences. The content of the passage was perceived to be familiar to candidates at 
this level, but many of them distorted the meaning of the passage or gave their own views on the topic. 
Only the very competent candidates managed to capture all the points made. 
Weakness in selecting the crucial elements was exacerbated by lack of vocabulary when candidates 
attempted to use their own language. The age-old error of ‗lifting‘ persists, and judging from the prevalence 
and persistence of this problem, it appears strongly that students are being taught to lift. This report draws 
attention to plagiarism, and stresses how vital it is for candidates to stay clear of the practice. A significant 
contributor to the candidates‘ difficulty is the apparent belief that the topic sentence of a paragraph must 
always come at the start of the paragraph. This belief is wrong and following it causes candidates to focus 
on minor features. As in the past, few candidates were able to maintain the correct relationships while 
reorganizing their points for brevity. They continued to cling steadfastly to both the pattern and the 
language of the original, a strategy that will work against conciseness. Candidates can be helped to learn 
how to. 
- 3 -
 differentiate between topic and supporting sentences 
 recognize the relationship between main points (cause and effect, solutions, alternatives) 
 distinguish between explanations, illustrations, etc. and the main point 
 determine when explanation is vital to good summary 
 test their summaries for over-generalization. 
The nature of summary (of the length required from candidates in the examination) is such that it eliminates 
all topic sentences, combining the information into a general thought (thesis). The candidate should 
therefore produce a single coherent paragraph. A close look at the syllabus section, Notes and Suggested 
Activities (specifically pages 6–12), will help both teacher and student to identify and hone summary skills. 
Strong support is also given in the new Nelson Thornes CXC English A Study Guide. 
Section B: Comprehension
Section B is designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one expository. The 
skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) (pages 2–3). Each passage has a 
different focus: in the expository type of passage the objectives are outlined in (a) and (b); in the other –
literary discourse – the greater number of questions satisfy Understanding (c). The results for Question 2 
strongly suggest that reading and analysing writing of a literary nature needs to be given more attention. 
Pages 12–14 of the syllabus should be invaluable. Where questions require information obvious in the text, 
candidates gain marks, but fail to read between the lines, understand inference, purpose, techniques, and 
connotative language. These are areas which need to be stressed, as in the ‗real-life‘ situation, the ability to 
penetrate the meaning of the written or spoken word is vital. Candidates with a weakness in responding to 
this kind of passage also find the Summary question very challenging. The mean on this question was 11 
out of 30 marks. 
Question 2 
The selection for this question was a brief extract from a novel by Rosa Guy. The questions set followed the 
specific objectives of Understanding (c). This aspect of the syllabus is detailed on page 3 of the syllabus, 
with explanations and examples starting on page 12 (Notes and suggested activities). Questions asked for 
supporting quotations, recognition of atmosphere, inference to be drawn from a sequence of behaviours, and 
evidence. This question was poorly answered. Candidates scored marks on questions where the answers 
were obvious (Questions (a) and (g)). Questions that required an interpretation and the recognition of 
writer‘s intent posed difficulties. Students should be encouraged to satisfy the requirements of questions —
for example, ―quote the sentence…‖ saw responses which quoted a few words. 
Question 3 
The content of this extract dealt with retirement savings: the relevance of financial literacy and the 
instituting of plans. This information was also within the experience and interest of the candidates. It lent 
itself well to factual questions, but also included questions requiring higher order skills — deduction and 
inferencing. The performance on this question was significantly better than on Question 2. Here again, 
questions that required candidates to draw inferences were challenging: for example, (f) required candidates 
to deduce the point that was being made; (h) tested candidates‘ understanding of the message in the last 
sentence, and to find the sentence near the start which gave the opposite view. Candidates experienced 
difficulty in providing precise answers. Many candidates showed an inability to differentiate between 
contextual meanings and literal meanings, treating both in the same ways, as in the case of ‗roadblocks‘ in 
Question (e). As in Question 2, there is the tendency by many candidates to cite several sentences to answer 
a question when a word or phrase is required. In Question (g), for example, many candidates gave 
unnecessary or contradictory information. The mean on this question was 8 out of 15 marks. 
- 4 -
Section C: Story Writing 
Of the three questions in this section, most candidates attempted Question 5. Question 6 was the least 
popular choice. Some excellent responses were generated from all topics. However, most responses were 
quite mundane. The use of Standard English still proves to be a challenge for too many candidates, with 
obvious interference from the creoles and dialects used in the region. Many stories were poor in using the 
elements of story writing. Students must be advised that use of the stimulus is a requirement. They must 
also be encouraged to take careful note of the rubric. 
Question 4 
This question used a picture of a young man, sitting under a tree, with a laptop computer on his lap as a 
stimulus. Around him is an array of books, some of them being study texts for CXC. Candidates seemed 
generally comfortable with the picture stimulus, but it did not give rise to any out-of-the-ordinary responses. 
Story lines tended to be similar and generally predictable. Unfortunately, some candidates failed to carry 
out the designated task and instead produced essays on ideas like the value of computers/technology in 
education. For candidates who have not learnt to discriminate among the different genres, the picture still 
proved to be a problem. The mean on this question was 13 out of 35 marks. 
Question 5 
Question 5 used as stimulus, the idea of a storm and the urgent need to warn people who were seen as being 
special. Very good responses came from candidates who used ‗storm‘ metaphorically. This approach 
allowed creativity and freshness. While most candidates attempted this question, it proved challenging for 
the following reasons: many candidates seemed confused by the tense and first person narration of the 
stimulus. These could not transition smoothly into their stories, so the beginning was used almost as a topic. 
There were many instances of confusion created by changes in point of view. Too often, there was little 
connection between the beginning and the content of the story. The mean on this question was 14 out of 35 
marks. 
Question 6 
Descriptive writing is a challenge for a large number of candidates. Most often, too few descriptive details 
are employed and too many responses are mainly narrative with some description. Candidates should be 
encouraged to help the audience to ‗see‘ the situation through the details they give. Most candidates who 
attempted this question still needed the framework of a narrative in which the description was incorporated. 
This is an acceptable approach to the question, since writing ‗pure‘ description can be quite challenging. 
Problems arose when candidates simply told stories with no attempt to describe. Yet, there were a few 
candidates who demonstrated competent descriptive writing techniques and produced interesting and lively 
writing, as the question ―was it real or science fiction?‖ triggered a wide variety of ideas. 
Section D: Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
The topics were well within the knowledge of candidates, and some very good work emerged. Nevertheless, 
as has been seen in the past, too many responses lacked adequate and well reasoned arguments/points and 
the requisite and appropriate argumentative devices to convince or persuade their audience. Question 8 was
the more popular, but better responses were written to Question 7. 
Question 7 required candidates to write an essay supporting the views of either of the following speakers: 
 
Speaker A: The government should cut subjects like Music and Visual Arts from the curriculum to save 
money in these hard economic times. 
Speaker B: No way! I think the government should find other ways to solve economic problems! 
- 5 -
In general, candidates tended to go off-track in Question 7. The more competent candidates made the link 
between solving the economic crisis without removing the subjects from the curriculum. Many candidates 
completely disregarded the economic factor and dealt only with the value of the Arts in education. 
These answers were reasonably good. Weaker essays dealt with education generally, or with what 
governments should do generally. The mean on this question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
Question 8 required a strong argument supporting or opposing the moot — ―Education is the only avenue 
for success in today‘s world‖. There was much rambling and narration of anecdotes, rather than a focus on 
arguing the point. More careful reading and attention to the thrust of the topic ―Education is the only 
avenue…‖ was needed. The mean on this question was 13 out of 35 marks. 
Recommendations for Teachers
 The quality of answers in Argument suggests that time management is an issue for many candidates. 
The main evidence of this is the extended length of answers for Section C, followed by short, 
unplanned and therefore poor quality arguments. Students would benefit from some coaching in how 
to manage their time.
 
 The problem in Section C is partly caused by unawareness of the elements of short story, and of 
effective ways to use the strategies that will develop the stories. Students need experience in editing to 
get rid of details which do not help the story. For example, students will give a long list of friends 
who attended a party when those friends have nothing to do with the outcome; or they will spend time 
describing a morning when they need to focus on the night the event took place. 
 The points following have been made before, but bear repeating in this report since they persist. 
 It is clear that large numbers of students across the Caribbean have not mastered the use of Standard 
English. There continues to be interference from dialects and patois used throughout the region; to 
these have been added the slangs originating from dancehall music and the North American ghettos 
and the abbreviations familiar to users of the messaging media of modern technology. For students 
who almost abhor reading, some methods must be found to encourage correct use of the language. 
 Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when summarizing 
and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their responses into a coherent 
whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to introduce these words into the active vocabulary 
of students. Practice in construction shifts and equivalent sentences would be useful. 
 The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both require 
thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
 Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words and sentences 
work in the language is important. 
 Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through exposure — if necessary, in class 
– to the reading of good literature. This includes focusing their attention to paragraphing, grammar, 
spelling, diction and other conventions of writing. 
 Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story writing and 
descriptive writing. 
 Greater use should be made of literature to teach writing — immersion into how stories work. 
 Strategies should be engaged to provide individual help to students so that individual needs can be 
addressed. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2013
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Overall, performance was moderate. There was a marked absence of superior scripts at one end, and also 
only a few incompetent scripts at the other. There was noticeable improvement in the Comprehension 
profile, but the Expression profile remained only fair, with only two per cent of candidates scoring 
Grade I on this profile. Candidates are encouraged to do more critical reading and discussion. As 
suggested last year, opportunities for more in-class reading and discussion should be created and geared 
to studying how writers say things and why. Such activities, through the use of a good model, provide 
candidates with an opportunity to widen their experiences. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple-Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. Approximately 80 per cent of the candidates received Grades 
I–III. Good performance was evidenced on Questions 1–20 which assessed grammar and mechanics of 
writing. Performance on the questions set on the literary passages was markedly better than on those set 
on the expository and persuasive texts. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
This section requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and to reproduce its meaning concisely 
and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak scripts usually indicate 
major problems with understanding of the passage, and with ability to express meaning in the candidate’s 
own words (synthesis). Too many candidates try to get by with lifting chunks of text, ‘cutting and 
pasting’ them together, and adding an occasional word or phrase. The latter is a poor attempt to hide the 
fact that they are reproducing the words of the passage. We advise that teaching should concentrate on 
helping students to grasp and reproduce meaning. Learning activities should include: 
 exercises in equivalent sentences — this can be extended beyond one sentence to a paragraph. 
 practice in comprehension that involves interpretation of meaning (not just rewording) executed 
both orally and in writing. 
The following is extracted from the January 2012 report and repeated here because it is crucial: 
Summary teaching involves two major processes: information gathering (reading, 
identifying, choosing and interpreting what is relevant) and information giving 
(synthesizing, organizing and writing). Teaching must move beyond 'identifying points' to 
include in summary to understanding how the text is written. Focusing on text 
organizational patterns such as cause and effect, problem and solution, before and after 
and similar developmental strategies, can lead students to greater comprehension and 
synthesis of information before they begin to write. 
3 
Question 1 
This summary question is awarded total marks of 30, evenly distributed under three headings: 
 Understanding (Content) 
 Organization 
 Expression 
Answers suggested that the text was well understood. The contents dealt with the appearance or reality of 
physical fitness. It noted that one could be deceived into seeing muscular structure as fitness, when in 
reality, many muscular persons were using anabolic steroids. These persons had the benefit of looks, but 
the passage told of the dangers of steroid use, and challenged persons to be sensible in their choices. 
In the area of Understanding, students continue to score well, but there are persistent problems with 
Expression and Organization. The language of the text (apart from the permitted use of technical 
expressions) is, most often, lifted, so that candidates score low marks. It seems to be the norm to ignore
the instruction use your own words as far as possible. Candidates still continue to ignore the prescribed 
length for the summary, despite repeated warnings that marks will be lost, although answers showed some 
improvement. The need to go over the limit suggests that candidates are not as capable as they might be, 
in organizing their thoughts, so they can expect a lower mark under Organization. Most candidates 
appear to have been encouraged to use the order of ideas given in the text. Only a few, usually those in 
the superior range, show enough understanding to group statements according to relationship, and so 
produce succinct and accurate summaries. 
Satisfactory answers to this question 
 recognized the deception of appearing fit 
 recognized the willingness to take shortcuts to appear fit 
 pointed out the dangers: physical, psychological and social 
 cautioned those who would like to be fit to make intelligent choices. 
If candidates are to better develop their skills, they need: 
 extensive practice in organizing their answers, using transition words to help themselves and the
reader with understanding 
 to practise vocabulary exercises which help them to use simple, correct language 
 reminders that reusing the words of the passage entirely (whether in its entirety, selected chunks or 
by joining phrases from all over) attracts no marks — as they would not have presented any language 
of their own for assessment
 engagement in more close-reading exercises, paying attention to recognizing tone/attitude and the 
writer's intention 
 to engage in exercises in which analysing the internal structure of passages is emphasized 
 instruction in how paragraph cohesion is achieved, and in the use of appropriate transitional and 
connective expressions. 
4 
Section B: Understanding 
Question 2 
This question, which is worth 15 marks, was a poem. Candidates responded fairly well to the questions 
set on the poem. This is a departure from what is generally experienced when a poem is presented. The 
individual parts of the question that proved challenging or problematic for Question 2 were (d), (e) and 
(f). 
Part (d) required an understanding of language use – purpose and style. Part (e) asked for reaction, and 
candidates failed to distinguish between feeling and action/reaction. 
In Part (f) both expressions that represented contrast were needed to demonstrate that contrast, and many 
candidates were not able to indicate both. 
Question 3 
This question was an expository piece discussing treatment of and reaction to global warming. Given that 
the passage dealt with an issue which should be familiar to candidates, the responses were disappointing. 
The average mark out of 15 was 5. Many candidates could not respond appropriately to the expressions: 
political football and fiddled with. The strong suggestion is that although they can recognize metaphorical 
language from the diction (mechanically) they are not able to penetrate the meaning of the expression and 
its value in the text. Responses also suggested that candidates are unable to read questions correctly —
they ignore some words, misinterpret others, or simply do not understand what the question is asking. 
This indicates that apart from reading and discussing various texts, candidates need to be given practice in 
interpretation, and in recognizing key words that would reduce the chance of irrelevancies. 
The teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined with the teaching of summary writing as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. Summary writing goes another step but 
understanding is the first stage. It is suggested that students be helped to be more focused on 
interpretation, more concerned with answering what is actually asked, rather than what is usually asked. 
As with Section A, much practice is advised in reading, listening, and reproducing meaning; in 
interpreting meaning at different levels; and in paying attention to accuracy. Developing sensitivity to 
how words and sentences work in the language is important, so that candidates rise above the level of 
seeing comprehension as guesswork. It is strongly recommended that teachers return to and apply 
Bloom’s (revised) Taxonomy, (for example), in developing questions. 
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
Following the now familiar pattern, there were three stimuli: Question 4, the picture; Question 5, the 
narrative prompt; Question 6, a descriptive essay responding to a specific setting. Question 5 was the 
most popular question, with twice as many candidates as those responding to Question 4, and three times 
as many as those choosing Question 6. 
Questions 4–5 
These questions are marked out of 35. The majority of the stories fell into range 3, with averages ranging
between 14 and 15 marks. 
5 
In Question 4, most candidates were able to use the stimulus satisfactorily, although the stories were not 
particularly strong. The stimulus to the narrative, Question 5, was also reasonably incorporated, although 
some candidates did little in constructing character, or meaningfully using the strategies of storytelling. 
Question 6 
In general, this question was not well done as candidates had a poor grasp of the requirements, and failed
to interpret the stimulus appropriately. Answers continue to be highly narrative. The majority of 
candidates do not grasp the need for descriptive details to create focus and are very weak in organizing 
movement of description. They demonstrate a lack of use of descriptive words and ability to create 
images, so visualization and interest are missing, and candidates resort to narrative. 
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
Question 7 
This question invited candidates to support or oppose the view that As long as government is paying for 
my education, it can tell me what to study. There were far-ranging interpretations, including: that the 
government could tell the candidate what specifically to study for the examination; the pros and cons of 
government-sponsored education; the right to freedom of choice. The question was the more popular 
choice, but the answers were generally poorly handled. 
Question 8 
This question asked candidates to express their views on the statement that A single Caribbean team 
should represent the region in all international sporting competitions. This statement lent itself to fewer 
interpretations. Examiners felt that candidates were unsure of the meaning of the term region. 
Recommendations 
 Planning: The rubrics which introduce each section of the examination paper invite candidates to 
plan their longer responses. This was often interpreted as ‘write the essay, then copy it’. This 
double-writing affects time negatively, and many answers showed the hurry to complete. Some 
candidates also failed to cross out the unwanted answer. The preparation for the examination 
should include the skill of outlining, so the candidate can make maximum use of the time.
 Language Use: The quality of language generally, but particularly in the questions which 
demand longer continuous answers (Questions 1, 4/5/6; 7/8) raises some concern: shifting tenses, 
lack of discrimination in past tenses, lack of subject and verb agreement, basic punctuation and 
spelling errors are all persistent problems. Very often, rereading reduces the number and type of
errors, and students should be taught how, and encouraged to reread critically. 
 Examiners advise that much more effort should be put into helping candidates to improve their 
stock of adjectives and adverbs, and to provide opportunities for studying and emulating good 
descriptive pieces. 
 Most candidates are exposed to the visual through television. This can be used constructively to 
help develop the skill of descriptive writing. Candidates may be invited to role-play, to be the 
camera or camera person. They should become familiar with the concepts of foreground, middle 
distance and background; with the techniques of panning and focusing; and helped to distinguish 
between concrete and abstract words and phrases. 
6 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have been prepared to write their argumentative 
essays along specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while 
some students do benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the 
risk that competent and even superior students will be forced into a mould which affects their 
expression and development negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and 
provide them with a variety of ways to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2013 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
- 2 - 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance overall this year was fair. Approximately 58 per cent of the candidates achieved Grades 
I to III. This was an increase over 2012 when the percentage of candidates who achieved this level 
was 47. Performance on the Expression profile continues to be only moderate with only four per cent 
of candidates achieved Grade I on this profile. Students must be engaged in the myriad of ways in 
which language is used. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. The trend of good performance on the items assessing 
vocabulary, and grammar was again evident. Performance in comprehension questions based on 
literary, informative and persuasive passages was fair. Items which caused difficulty included those 
relating to recognizing and assessing the use of devices, recognizing mood, tone and style and 
distinguishing between the author’s attitude and attitudes of characters
Paper 02 – Free Responses 
SECTION A 
Question 1 
Analysis of this section has frequently appealed to teachers and students to pay more attention to it. 
The responses for July marking 2013 demonstrate some improvement, and suggest that the entreaties 
have been recognised.
- 3 - 
The passage to be summarised was an article entitled ‘Water’ adapted from Global Environment 
Outlook for Youth in the Caribbean – A Vision for Change! The passage highlighted the current 
situation in which the world is in imminent danger of water shortage, partly because water is taken for 
granted in some places while the supply is abused in others. The world does in fact does have 
sufficient water for all, but modern management measures must be employed to ensure continued 
world supply. The passage also points out the importance of water supply to economic prosperity, and 
indeed to the well being of human society.
This section was allotted 30 marks distributed evenly in 3 areas under Profiles 1 and 2. 
PROFILE 1 PROFILE 2
Content
(understanding) 
10 MARKS 
Organistion
10 MARKS 
Language 
10 MARKS 
Content 
 There was improvement with regard to meeting the word limit and attempting the question. 
 The vast majority of candidates understood well that the passage was about water supply. 
They also picked up on the inadequacy of current conservation strategies and the need to 
ensure that water would be available for future generations. Despite their understanding of 
these key issues, some candidates lost marks in Area 1 because they were unable to express 
said issues accurately and coherently with respect to the original passage. E.g. in the 
statement: 
“At the global scale there is enough water to provide water security for 
socioeconomic, technical and institutional aspect of water use” 
- 4 - 
Students seemed to have recognised and understood the point but repeated the words
“At the…security”, and then copied the last part: “for socioeconomic … water use” 
out of context because they did not grasp the correct relationship. 
The following are some of the distortions noted: 
 the scarcity of water was seen as a present reality but not as a future crisis, so in many cases 
there was no reference to the looming water crisis 
 water shortage was misinterpreted and referred to as water storage 
 ‘forecast’ (para 2) was aligned to weather reports. 
 attempts to meet the word limit by using telegraphic language resulting in incoherent 
responses. 
Superior responses demonstrated excellence in reproducing the critical elements of the original 
passage in the candidate’s own words, most often in flawless or near flawless language. In a few 
instances responses indicated a superior understanding of content but some weakness in language. 
Responses assessed as suggesting or demonstrating incompetence included one or more of the 
following: 
 The introduction of extraneous material based on prior knowledge, both technical and casual. 
 Misinformation prompted by imperfect understanding of details. E.g. “While a political 
commitment is not simple, we must demand it.” This was entirely out of context and based 
on two sentences in the original: “The best initiatives are those that make a political 
commitment to consider water as an integral part of sustainable human development...”; 
“There is no quick fix or simple solution when it comes to safeguarding and managing a 
resource that is in as much demand as water.”  Incomplete ideas. 
- 5 - 
Organization 
The passages used for examination purposes are paragraphed. They follow the principles of 
paragraphing: a topic sentence and a number of supporting sentences. In writing summary, students 
are taught to recognise the topic sentence in each paragraph, and to use the meanings generated from 
them to create a generalized piece of writing. This suggests that the length of the piece they submit 
will not allow the use of paragraphs. This is a concept grasped and demonstrated by the superior 
student, and the understanding of the generalization principle is important for all students if they are 
to improve their skills in summary. 
Superior responses were easily recognizable due to the smooth transition from one thought to the 
other and the demonstrated ability of the candidate to re-arrange the original passage into a coherent 
whole while maintaining its perspective, purpose, tone, as well as sense of audience without losing 
content. 
Responses at a low level of competence follow the paragraphing of the original slavishly. They do not 
recognise the relationship between points that do not follow each other in the original. They generally 
show a passive understanding of some sentences and phrases in the extract and reproduce these 
verbatim. Examples of this in the paper under review include: 
 At the global scale, there is enough water to provide “water security” for all...
 The scarcity of water is a very relative concept... 
 A basket of factors including socioeconomic, technical and institutional aspects of water 
use... 
 Sustainable human development...
 Inequitable distribution of water...
 Our managerial capacity has to be upgraded... 
Included below are the salient points of the passage, and one of the sample summaries used to 
standardize the marking. 
- 6 - 
 Water is vital to all aspects of life and human activity. It is often taken for granted and its 
value is overlooked. 
 Water scarcity means different things in different places but everywhere it relates to a 
country’s economic and social activities and to people’s attitudes to water.
 World shortage is not actual because there is really enough water for all, but the threat is 
caused by careless attitudes, outdated management of resources, and waste. The impact is 
that a very large portion of the world will face real scarcity by 2025. 
 Attention must be given to the problem in order to ensure that future generations have water 
and that the needs of the poor are addressed.
 The solution will come from a change in our attitude to water use, the appropriate valuing of 
water, and the employment of updated management strategies. 
Sample summary: 
People today seldom think of water shortage; however, it is predicted that by 2025 this could be a 
reality for billions. The crisis will not result from real water scarcity, but from poor management and 
attitudes. Addressing the problem means considering all factors related to water use. Water is 
critical to each country’s economic and cultural well being, and ideal practices must focus on 
sustainable human development and the reduction of poverty. If water is to be distributed equitably 
we have to recognise its value and the need to conserve for the future. The answer will not be found 
easily, and requires that management practices be updated to meet modern requirements. 
 (111 words) 
Advice to Teachers 
Judging from the relatively few instances of ‘no response’ to Section A, students are more willing to 
attempt summary writing. However, they continue to be hindered in their efforts by inadequate 
vocabulary which affects both comprehension and summary production. There is also low/no use of 
- 7 - 
connectives resulting in summaries that read more like lists of bulleted items than continuous prose. 
Generally speaking, however, there has been improvement in candidates’ ability to meet the demands 
of this section. Following are some suggestions to keep the improvement going: 
 Introduce summary writing early – some students need to start in the first year of secondary 
school, particularly if their reading levels are not up to required standard. 
 Constantly reinforce vocabulary and effective punctuation. 
 Give students practice in writing within a specified word limit. 
 Provide students with activities aimed at understanding and using appropriate connectives. 
 Provide students with activities aimed at mastering interpretation and construction shift. 
 Encourage students to use their own word; discourage lifting from original passages. 
SECTION B
In keeping with the specifications of the syllabus and the design of the Specimen Paper, poetry can be 
used on Paper 2, and in Paper 1. Analysis of the results in this year’s examinations indicated that the 
two stimuli used created a good balance.
Question 2 
In this section candidates were able to benefit from the allocation of marks for partial answers. The 
allocation of marks allowed candidates to score 1 point on questions with a full score of 2 marks. On 
the other hand, candidates lost marks when they failed to be specific as required, or put answers 
which required the examiner to select the correct response. 
- 8 - 
The poem “Carrion Crows” was within the candidates’ experience. They clearly understood what the 
poem was about. Candidates were aware that there were negative and positive aspects about the 
behavior of the crows themselves, but not all were able to make these distinctions between the crows' 
attitude, the poet's attitude, and the poet's craft. It was evident that a few candidates found Questions 
(d) and (g) challenging because they lacked the vocabulary to describe what they knew. These 
questions required understanding of the terms “effect” and “attitude”. On the other hand, the answers 
to (a) (b) and (c) which required explicitly stated information, were generally correct. Some 
candidates seemed unsure of what to identify specifically as alliteration and metaphor, and quoted the 
entire line in which the device was used: " And I have seen them perched on paling post" as opposed 
to "perched on paling post". 
Question 3 
There were a few “No Responses” for individual parts of this question, possibly because of poor time 
management, and also because questions demanded interpretation and deduction. Question (h), “what 
action concerning the environment would be recommended to the government of Socrato based on the 
information in the last paragraph”, was one such question. Most candidates listed recommendations 
that were based on what the passage stated as problems: for example some recommended that over 
fishing and excess road building should stop. The weaker candidates made recommendations about
environmental issues that the passage/paragraph did not address. The better candidates, it seems, were 
either in command of effective comprehension strategies, and were able to make recommendations 
with more far-reaching effects on the environment such as “Be careful about development which 
disturbs and destroys the natural environment”.
Advice to Teachers
 It is recommended that teachers pay closer attention to writer's techniques, attitudes and 
purpose, and to commenting on the effectiveness of devices used. 
- 9 - 
 Candidates still need practice in quoting relevant and specific phrases and identifying key 
words. 
 Candidates require more help in determining what specific questions ask, so that their 
responses may be specific. 
SECTION C
Question 4 
Although the story based on the picture is not usually very popular with candidates, this year it was 
the one which most candidates attempted. Perhaps this was because most candidates would have been 
familiar with the scenario, even if only vicariously. Perhaps because of this familiarity, many 
candidates did not seem to have worked very hard to produce interesting responses. Most were 
therefore simple, very similar, predictable narratives which lacked creativity. 
Question 5 
Of the two questions set for story-writing this proved the more challenging. Many candidates 
experienced difficulty incorporating the sentences into their answers. Skilled candidates responded to 
the stimulus in effective, interesting ways. This does not suggest that the question was too difficult: 
candidates writing this examination should be able to cope competently with a question like this. 
Unfortunately this stimulus was seen by many as an opportunity to produce television-styled violence 
instead of effective characterization and meaningful conflict. 
- 10 - 
Question 6
This question required a descriptive essay based on the stimulus “It was all done; all the groups were 
sure that nothing more could be added. Emotions were mixed as we quietly studied that large room. 
Describe the scenes and reactions you saw.”
Although more candidates have a clearer understanding of the requirements of a descriptive essay 
than previously, the number of responses remains in the minority. The problems persist: 
 Most candidates who attempted the question were unable to differentiate between a 
descriptive essay and a story. Even when there was description, it was bound to particular 
characters or locations in the narrative.
 There was again misinterpretation of the question so many responses were weak or irrelevant. 
Many candidates did not see or did not understand “It was all done;” or could not figure out 
how it was important to the response. 
There is concern about the significant amount of interference from local creoles/dialects on the 
Standard English of large numbers of candidates writing this exam. Examples of this interference 
were again seen in areas such as the non-marking of past tenses, weak spelling, and the use of 
pronouns which have no antecedents. 
Other problems with the mechanics of the language continue to be evident; for example; 
 punctuation, especially in run-on sentences - perhaps this problem is indicative of a more 
serious issue: lack of understanding of sentence structure. 
 non-use of paragraphs - many candidates write pages of the story in one long unbroken 
block. 
- 11 - 
Advice to Teachers
 There is a pressing need to deal with the issues of (1) relevance, (2) singularity of event, and 
to a lesser extent (3) point of view, so that candidates may better meet the requirements of 
length and focus in their stories. 
 Candidates are asked in this section to use Standard English to respond to a particular 
stimulus. Candidates need to be encouraged to be self critical where relevance is 
concerned. Weak candidates and those with a low level of competence tend to write 
pages of script before getting to the point of the response. The importance of ‘point of 
view’ and the need to control it must be emphasized so that clarity of the plot is 
maintained. 
SECTION D
Questions 7 & 8 
Overall, there were improvements in the use of language -grammar and mechanics in particular, in 
comparison to previous years. With regard to time management, this year it seems that more 
candidates answered the questions. There were fewer incidents of "No Response". Despite the 
shortcomings of some candidates who answered the questions in letter format or in the narrative form, 
it was clear that most candidates understood the concept of persuasive writing and used devices and 
transitions as needed. 
The questions to which candidates responded are below. 
Question 7 
“Government should offer free health care for everyone residing in a country, 
nationals and non-nationals alike.”
- 12 - 
Write an essay EITHER supporting OR opposing this view. 
Question 8 
“School principals should consult with the student body on ALL matters affecting the 
lives of the students.” 
Write an essay giving your views on this statement. 
Question 7 
 Some candidates misinterpreted the term ‘non-national’, and either ignored or did not 
understand the word 'residing' - which should have given them the hint as to what "non￾national ' meant. 
 Some candidates did not define the key terms from the chosen stimulus, while other had 
incorrect definitions. 
 Little or no supporting evidence was given for the perspectives being given in the essay. 
 Many students agreed that health care should be free but did not present clear arguments 
that demonstrated the benefits of such a venture. 
 A few candidates interpreted the word "country" to mean a rural area, rather than their 
home territory.
 Question 8 
 Many candidates misinterpreted the term "student body" to mean the Students' Council or the 
students' physical bodies. 
 The word "consult" created some ambiguity which resulted in various interpretations . 
Common among these interpretations, was the notion that "consult" referred to the principal's 
role as counselor. 
 The expression ‘all matters' was not handled effectively. 
- 13 - 
 The points posited by candidates were generally not well developed. There was an absence of 
supporting details or appropriate rhetorical devices. Some candidates merely listed the issues 
without any attempt to argue how consultation would address these issues. 
 Most of the issues identified were home related such as divorce, violence and abuse. 
Advice to Teachers
 There continues to be significant concern that too many candidates have sentence 
construction challenges: sentence splices; hanging sentences; fragments; and run-on 
sentences. Many used the vernacular of their countries. 
 Instruction may benefit from the use of more class discussions in which students are 
challenge to say WHY they hold their perspectives. 
 Opportunity to critique written arguments from well-known persons or good Internet sources 
should go some way in encouraging better understanding and production of argument. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
PROFILE CUT-OFFS
[WEIGHTED]
JANUARY 2013 
PROFILE 01 
(MAX = 76) 
GRADES SCORE
PROFILE 02 
(MAX = 114) 
GRADES SCORE
I 52 (68%) I 71 (65%) 
II 44 (58%) II 60 (53%) 
III 35 (46%) III 51 (45%) 
IV 27(36%) IV 39 (34%) 
V 13 (17%) V 17 (15%) 
VI <13 VI <17 
COMPOSITE CUT-OFFS
[WEIGHTED]
GRADES COMPOSITE CUT-OFF
I 123 (65%) 
II 104 (55%) 
III 86 (45%) 
IV 66 (35%) 
V 30 (16%)
VI <16 
2 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
QUESTION CUT-OFFS BY PROFILE 
PAPER 02
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
PROFILE 1 PROFILE 2
GRADES GRADES
I II III IV V VI I II III IV V VI
1. 7 6 5 4 2 <2 13 11 9 7 3 <3
2. 11 9 7 6 3 <3 NOT APPLICABLE
3. 11 9 7 6 3 <3 NOT APPLICABLE
4. 
NOT APPLICABLE
22 18 15 12 5 <5
5. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
6. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
7. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
8. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
PAPER CUT-OFFS
[RAW] 
PAPER 01 
(60) 
GRADES SCORE
PAPER 02 
(130) 
GRADES SCORE
I 39 (65%) I 54 (41.5%) 
II 34 (56.6%) II 47 (36.1%) 
III 29 (48.3%) III 38 (29.2%) 
IV 23 (38.3%) IV 31 (23.84%) 
V 20 (33.3%) V 11 (8.4%) 
VI <20 VI <11 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
TABLE OF SPECIFICATIONS 
PAPER 01 – GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
Number Objective Cognitive Level Question 
Number Objective Cognitive Level 
1. UA Application 31. UC Comprehension
2. UA Application 32. UC Comprehension
3. UA Application 33. UC Comprehension
4. UA Application 34. UC Comprehension
5. UA Application 35. UC Comprehension
6. UA Application 36. UC Comprehension
7. UA Application 37. UC Comprehension
8. UA Application 38. UC Comprehension
9. UA Application 39. UC Comprehension
10. UA Application 40. UD Comprehension
11. UA Application 41. UD Comprehension
12. UA Application 42. UD Comprehension
13. UA Application 43. UD Comprehension
14. UA Application 44. UD Comprehension
15. UA Application 45. UD Comprehension
16. UA Application 46. UB Comprehension
17. UA Application 47. UB Comprehension
18. UA Application 48. UB Comprehension
19. UA Application 49. UB Comprehension
20. UA Application 50. UB Comprehension
21. UC Comprehension 51. UB Comprehension
22. UC Comprehension 52. UB Comprehension
23. UC Comprehension 53. UB Comprehension
24. UC Comprehension 54. UB Comprehension
25. UC Comprehension 55. UD Comprehension
26. UC Comprehension 56. UD Comprehension
27. UC Comprehension 57. UD Comprehension
28. UC Comprehension 58. UD Comprehension
29. UC Comprehension 59. UD Comprehension
30. UC Comprehension 60. UD Comprehension
60 questions – 1 mark each 
Profile assessed – Understanding 
Total UA – 20
Total UB – 9 
Total UC – 19
Total UD – 12
Total 
40 – Comprehension 
20 – Application 
2 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
TABLE OF SPECIFICATIONS 
PAPER 02 – GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
Number Profile and Marks Awarded Syllabus 
Objective Cognitive Level 
1. Understanding – 10 marks 
Expression – 20 marks 
UB Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
2. (a) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
 (b) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
 (c) Understanding – 1 mark UC Application 
(d) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension
(e) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension
(f) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
(g) Understanding – 2 marks UC Application 
 (h) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
(i) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
3. (a) Understanding – 1 mark UB Comprehension
(b) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension
 (c) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (d) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (e) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
(f) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
(g) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (h) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
4. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis
5. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
6. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
7. Expression – 35 marks UD Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
8. Expression – 35 marks UD Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
Understanding – 40 marks
Expression 195 marks (Total expression marks candidates can achieve on this paper is 90) 
Cognitive Levels 
Comprehension – 15 
Application – 2 
Comprehension/Application/Synthesis – 5 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
 EXAMINATION 
JANUARY 2014 
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance in January 2014 compared favourably with the results in earlier years. As has come to be 
the norm, there was neither an outstanding improvement, nor significant decline, but the results continued 
to be skewed towards the lower grades. The incidence of candidates being wholly unprepared for the 
examination was again relatively small, yet most responses tended to fall into the category of being 
‘adequate’. Teachers are urged to make use of the various guidelines and aids to learning being 
developed by the Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC), to help students be more comfortable with 
both language and literature, and to improve language through the skills acquired in studying literature. 
One resource is the syllabus document, in which there is a large section which helps with interpreting the 
syllabus objectives and requirements, and suggests a variety of activities which can help in developing the 
appropriate skills. 
Taken as a whole, there is some improvement in the performance, but individual questions as expected, 
show fluctuations in quality. Candidates seem to lack strategies to help them use their time and skills to 
the best advantage under examination conditions. At the start of each question there are instructions and 
cautions to which examination candidates need to be encouraged to give thoughtful and careful attention. 
The following advice was among several pieces offered to instructors in 2009, and is still very relevant 
today: 
Students should come to the examination with a well-rehearsed procedure for tackling 
each question…they should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure for identifying 
the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is 
especially important in writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and 
in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each student, based on the 
student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy 
under examination conditions. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was good. Approximately 84 per cent of candidates received Grades I–III. 
Exercises on word choice, sentence completion and equivalent sentences were well done. The area in 
which greatest weakness was evident was usage where candidates experienced difficulty recognizing 
sentences which contained clichés, misused metaphors or redundancies, and sentences that were incorrect 
grammatically. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
This section of the paper — summary — tests skills which people generally use daily in summing up 
responses to life’s experiences. It is an academic activity therefore which has practical value, and 
3 
students might respond better to the challenges of summary if teachers remember to teach for the transfer 
of skills. Discussions with persons approaching tertiary level academic pursuits, and with many in the 
work sector, indicate that there is a strong tendency to confuse the strategies — paraphrasing, quoting and 
summarizing. 
There are also observations that while secondary level students are required to research and produce 
scholarly evidence, the manner of presentation accepted is very often sheer plagiarism. The plagiarized 
presentation delivers the impression that the student is low in understanding. For this reason teachers are 
encouraged to explore with the students the Skills and Abilities to be Assessed as presented in the 
syllabus document: Understanding (a) and (b) (i) to (x), and (d) (i) and (ii); Expression (a) and (b). 
Question 1 
Among the comments which examiners and assistant examiners made on the passage and task were: 
 The instructions given to the question clearly indicated what was expected of candidates. 
 Candidates seemed able to relate well to the passage as the issues addressed were within their 
experience. 
 The level of vocabulary in the passage was not unduly challenging. 
 The length was suitable to the time frame allowed. 
Comments made on the candidates’ responses included the following:
Strengths 
 General understanding of the passage 
 The ability to identify key points 
 Organization of material 
Weaknesses 
 Using transitional devices 
 Creating accuracy because of some inability to interpret or express relationships 
 Far too much lifting of phrases and sentences rather than using their own words 
 General expression 
The points expected in the summary were: 
 The 1990s widespread encouragement of lower income persons to enter university has led to 
disappointment and frustration. 
 Governments cannot maintain the costs. 
 Students entering university have unrealistic hopes and expectations from the degrees. 
 Students entering university require remedial help. 
 Falling standards have resulted from lower level entry requirements. 
 When universities seek higher fees students are frustrated. 
4 
 There are too many graduates in areas which are not vital to national development. 
 Jobs formerly held by those without degrees are now claimed by the high numbers of graduates, 
thus causing employment and job dislocation. 
Section B: Understanding 
Questions 2 and 3 
The passages in this section followed the established pattern: one literary piece, one expository piece. 
Examiners were happy with the length and degree of complexity/simplicity in both passages. The first 
passage was an extract from God Bless the Child, published in Essence, September 2006. The issue dealt 
with homelessness and the impact on children. 
The examiners’ overall assessment was that most candidates attempted all questions, and interpreted them 
satisfactorily. The major problems came from questions that required skills of literary analysis. Such 
questions included: 
 Why does the writer use the expression…?
 List two ways in which the family was affected by the mother’s decision.
 What is the narrator’s attitude to the situation described in the passage? 
The expository passage was less well handled. Its subject was Yoga in the Caribbean. Though the 
language was well within their reach, it was observed that some candidates appeared to be unfamiliar with 
the term Yoga. Most of the candidates’ difficulties arose from inadequate vocabulary, and a weak 
response to the written expression, that is, weakness in analysing the written word. 
The questions offering most challenges were (b) and (c), which asked for recognition of contrast; (e), in 
which the word “complementary” appeared to be unfamiliar (it was frequently interpreted as meaning 
‘free’); and (f), which required an appreciation of connotation and denotation, indicating that there is still 
some inability to distinguish between literal and figurative language. 
Teachers and students are again referred to the Skills and Abilities to be Assessed section of the syllabus 
and encouraged to pay attention to Understanding (c) — grasp insights from reading literature. 
Other persistent problems are the failure to use quotation marks when asked to quote, and the use of full 
sentences when asked for phrases. This becomes a problem when the sentence used contains ideas that 
are opposed to the answer required. 
5 
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
For the January examination, candidates were given more details in the instruction to encourage them to 
be conscious of their task. This seems generally to have brought good results. Problems continue, 
however, in the ability to distinguish between narrative and description. 
Question 4 
It was noted that candidates were better able to respond to the picture stimulus. Though there were 
responses which were expository, these were fewer — an improvement over the past. 
Question 5 
For the most part, responses were satisfactory. Candidates in instances were able to use the stimulus to 
develop interesting story lines and characters. Stories were generally effectively organized. The areas of 
weakness were in most instances weak language structure and mechanics. 
Question 6 
This question continues to produce answers that make heavy use of narration rather than description, but 
there has been improvement in the number and quality of the descriptions. 
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
Question 7 
As with Section C, examiners felt that the expanded rubric worked to the candidates’ advantage. Several 
approaches to the dialogue seemed possible, but candidates successfully responded to a selection of 
aspects given in the stimulus. Valid points were made and correct arguments and strategies employed. 
Question 8 
This was the more popular choice of stimulus. Again, there was scope for several interpretations or 
reactions, as there was some scope for addressing some social issues. Responses suggested that 
candidates identified with the topic. 
Weaker scripts demonstrated: 
 Inability to develop points rationally 
 Poor organization 
 Limited vocabulary 
 Weak sentence structure 
 Misuse/overuse of the rhetorical question 
 Inadequate linking of points/paragraphs 
6 
Assistance with this part of the syllabus is found in the document, under the heading Expression. The 
section with suggested activities, in particular Expression (c) and (d) contains many suggestions. 
Recommendations 
 Planning: The rubrics which introduce each section of the examination paper invite candidates to 
plan their longer responses. This was often interpreted as ‘write the essay, then copy it’. This 
double-writing affects time negatively, and many answers showed the hurry to complete. Some 
candidates also failed to cross out the unwanted answer. The preparation for the examination 
should include the skill of outlining, so the candidate can make maximum use of the time.
 Language Use: The quality of language generally, but particularly in the questions which 
demand longer continuous answers (Questions 1, 4/5/6; 7/8) raises some concern: shifting tenses, 
lack of discrimination in past tenses, lack of subject and verb agreement, basic punctuation and 
spelling errors are all persistent problems. Very often, rereading reduces the number and type of 
errors, and students should be taught how, and encouraged to reread critically. 
 Examiners advise that much more effort should be put into helping candidates to improve their 
stock of adjectives and adverbs, and to providing opportunities for studying and emulating good 
descriptive pieces. 
 Most candidates are exposed to the visual through television. This can be used constructively to 
help develop the skill of descriptive writing. Candidates may be invited to role-play, to be the 
camera or camera person. They should become familiar with the concepts of foreground, middle 
distance and background; with the techniques of panning and focusing; and helped to distinguish 
between concrete and abstract words and phrases. 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have been prepared to write their argumentative 
essays along specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while 
some students do benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the 
risk that competent and even superior students will be forced into a mould which affects their 
expression and development negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and 
provide them with a variety of ways to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
 EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2014 
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
– 2 –
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance in English A remained moderate in the May/June 2014 examination sitting. Fifty-nine per cent 
of the candidates achieved Grades I to III, consistent with overall performance in May/June 2013 when 58 
per cent of the candidates achieved similar grades. There was a moderate improvement in performance on 
Paper 01, which assesses Profile 1, Understanding, and a small improvement on Paper 02 which also 
assesses Understanding but focuses primarily on Profile 2, Expression. 
However, performance on Paper 02 continues to be below the expected standard. The questions in the three 
sections on this paper generally elicited only moderate levels of performance. General weakness was 
observed in many candidates’ inability to organize ideas and to use grammatical English in expressing these 
ideas. 
The instructions to Sections A, B, and C have been expanded in order to help the candidates maximize 
responses and scoring opportunities. There is some evidence that the candidates’ attention has been drawn 
to this feature, but more encouragement is necessary to ensure greater compliance with these instructions. 
Too many candidates lapsed into the vernacular in answering Questions 2 and 3, and in responses to Section 
C.
Apart from the grammar, vocabulary and expression issues, poor handwriting and spelling stand in the way 
of obtaining the best marks. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple-Choice 
Generally performance on Paper 01 was good, with approximately 82 per cent of candidates achieving the 
three top grades. The areas of particularly weak performance on this paper were the questions set on the 
expository extract. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
Question 1 
Candidates were instructed to read an article about the moon and its perceived effects on various aspects of 
life and activity on Earth, and then write a summary not exceeding 120 words. While the article captured 
the attention through a popular connection between the moon and insanity, that was not its focus. The 
article established through examples, that some ideas about the moon’s influence leaned towards the 
scientific, others towards popular folk tales and beliefs, and that research and investigation continue. 
Candidates’ responses were generally in the moderate to lower levels of competence. While many were able 
to recognize and express the moon’s importance to life, its suspected link to insanity and other negative 
behaviours, many were deceived by their own knowledge of the myths, folklore and old wives’ tales which 
are associated with the moon and focused incorrectly on these areas. Answers strongly suggested weakness 
in understanding the passage, and an inability to analyse the ideas expressed in it. This meant that such 
candidates were, in turn, unable to express those ideas cogently and in their own words. Answers showed 
significant weakness in making appropriate links between ideas, resulting in inappropriate strategies, 
ranging from repetition and/or extensive ‘lifting’, to the extreme of simply copying the passage until the 
word limit had been reached. 
– 3 –
A major hindrance to successful summary is lack of vocabulary, and poor expression. The CXC English A 
syllabus strongly suggests and seeks to foster a working relationship between literature and language. This 
gives students the benefit of experiencing, first hand, language in effective use. Use of good literature does 
not seek to force students to study literature per se, but exposes them to the quality of vocabulary and syntax 
that create good expression. 
The following italicized section is taken from the scheme used for marking the summary in each English A 
examination, and should be kept in mind as part of the teaching: 
Content 
The answer will be judged for its adequacy with respect to the following criteria within the set word limit. 
 Selection and accuracy of details (and their original linkages) and their completeness. 
 Clarity and faithfulness in respect of purpose/intent, and appropriateness of message and tone. 
 Attention to perspective/point-of-view and consistency of focus. 
Organisation of Content 
 Arrangement presented through sequencing, selection of cohesive ties, achievement of economy. 
 Arrangement of information in a coherent structure and sense of audience. 
Points to be noted in the answer: 
The moon is believed to have a variety of effects on all forms of life, but the extent to what is fact and what 
is fiction is still unclear. People are still inclined to mix scientific thought with myth. The facts are: 
 The moon has a strong gravitational pull on large masses of water on earth. 
 The human body is 70 per cent water, but it is too small to be affected by the moon. 
 The moon’s phases affect the reproductive cycles of humans and marine life. 
The beliefs are: 
 Madness, arson and violent crimes increase with the full moon. 
 More babies are born with the full moon. 
There is a suggestion that human behaviours are affected by beliefs, and research shows some correlation 
between change of behaviour and the changes of the moon. 
Sample Summary: 
Sample 1 
Several aspects of our lives, and events on a planet, have long been associated with the moon and its phases. 
Some of these things are built on scientific fact, others on folk beliefs. Researchers have investigated some 
of the beliefs, but results are inconclusive. One accepted feature is that the moon affects reproduction 
among females and some sea creatures. There is the belief that our bodies which are 70% water, are 
affected by the moon, but since such effects are only shown on large bodies of water, the belief is 
questionable. The moon’s connection to madness is also questionable. One lecturer in psychology suggests 
that our beliefs shape our lives and that we change our behaviour according to the things we believe. (110 
words) 
– 4 –
Sample 2 
It has been long believed that the moon affect many forms of life in some way. Some effects have been 
accepted by scientists such as the moon’s influence on the movement of large bodies of water and the 
reproductive cycles of women and some types of shellfish. There is the belief that there is a correlation 
between the moon’s phases and negative changes in human brain activity and actions. Anecdotes 
suggesting a rise in the number of babies being born at a particular time of the month and an increase in 
violent crimes have been linked to the moon’s cycle. Although the results of research into these areas have 
been inconclusive, the moon continues to fascinate us. (119 words) 
Sample 3 
People have long been led by evidence or story, to believe that the moon influences our lives. For instance, 
scientists accept the moon’s influence on reproduction among marine life, and its effect on the human 
female’s menstrual cycle. It is also known that the moon’s gravity affects water on Earth, but that water 
must be in very large quantities, so effects on the human body are rejected. Some people link insanity, 
higher birth rate, and periodic peaks in violent crime with the full moon. Scientists are investigating 
because of the many stories of lunar effects, true or imagined generally there is some acceptance of a 
connection between the full moon and behaviour changes, but conclusions are still mixed. (118 words) 
Superior responses reproduced the critical elements of the original passage in the candidate’s own words, 
most often in flawless or near flawless language. In a few instances, responses indicated a superior 
understanding of content but some weakness in language. 
Responses assessed as suggesting or demonstrating incompetence included one or more of the following: 
 The introduction of extraneous material based on prior knowledge. 
 Misinformation prompted by inadequate understanding of details. 
 Incomplete ideas. 
 A listing of ideas with no recognition of the relationship between points. 
Recommendations for Teaching 
Comprehension skills (primarily) and summary writing skills need to be reinforced. Students should: 
 be exposed to a wide range of expository passages and be guided in analysing text structures and 
modes of development 
 receive more practice in expressing what they read in their own words 
 be given exercises using transitional words 
 be exposed to good summaries which they are encouraged to critically examine for content, 
technique and length 
 be encouraged to participate in oral exercises in recounting versus summarizing (using topical 
issues, events and popular shows) which will grasp their attention, stimulate understanding, and 
demonstrate the goals of summary 
 exposed to sessions of functional vocabulary 
As understanding and summary exercises done in the classroom demonstrate mastery, attention should then 
be given to completing tasks within a given time frame. Penalizing the use of the language of the passage 
will drive home the value of using one’s own words.
Teachers are also encouraged to make use of the Internet, and to encourage students themselves to explore 
this avenue. It will alert them to the value of the skill, and break the tedium of the classroom. What the 
students learn, they can themselves introduce or teach to their peers. Several URL’s will be evident through 
a Google search, many of them produced by teachers. 
– 5 –
Section B: Understanding 
Section B continues to offer the candidates two short pieces of writing for study and comprehension: one 
piece expository, the other literary. These questions assess candidates’ preparedness to interact with various 
kinds of writing in their adult life, including their ability to recognize fact and fiction, and to appreciate the 
wealth of meaning conveyed by good writing. It seems, however, that the students are not challenged during 
their preparation for the examination, to recognize the different kinds of writing; their purposes, audiences, 
and styles, and therefore to expect a difference in the kinds of questions attached to each type of writing. 
According to the syllabus, candidates are expected to consider and appreciate the various techniques used 
and their effects; to recognize and understand literal and figurative language; to be able to quote accurately; 
to know the differences between ‘phrase’, ‘sentence’, ‘word’ and ‘expression’; to find the direct statement 
and the inference. Unfortunately, the evidence is that most candidates are able only to respond adequately to 
the straightforward, information-gathering kind of question. 
Question 2 
This question consisted of an extract from Harvey River: Memoir of My Mother and Her Island. The term 
‘memoir’ should have alerted candidates that this is more artistic than factual. It makes use of figurative 
language from the first sentence, “Hard Life was an ill-mannered visitor …” and uses expressions like “oily￾mouthed feasts’, for instance. Individual sub-questions asked candidates to recognize the words and phrases 
which created particular meaning and many candidates did not demonstrate the ability to do so. Many also 
failed to respond well to questions which asked for purpose, effect, feeling, description of character, or 
recognition of irony. 
Question 3 
This question presented a discussion on the effects of fast food. The passage is written in a matter-of-fact 
style, provides definitions, offers evidence through statistics and cites authority and is more in keeping with 
the kind of passage that candidates seem to like. Candidates appeared to have understood the content, but 
had severe difficulty in expressing meaning. One of the problems noted was a carry-over from Section A: a 
question which enquires interpretation cannot be effectively answered by simply lifting a sentence and 
presenting it as the answer. Based on this particular passage, candidates were required to recognize attitude, 
explain phrases, identify intention, recognize implications and give reasons. All of these proved to be very 
challenging tasks. Very noticeable again was the problem caused by poor vocabulary and, it is strongly 
suspected, by lack of exposure to extended, high-quality writing on various topics. Challenging words in 
this extract included “epidemic” and “unnecessarily”.
Recommendations for Teaching 
 Make use of high-quality magazine articles which provide writing that is modern, and factual without 
being pedantic and ‘highbrow’.
 Teach students how to structure answers. For instance, when a question asks “What is the writer’s
purpose, the answer must include the infinitive: “To…” 
 Recognize that figurative language is not restricted to literary texts. 
 Use the CXC literature texts as part of the language instruction. 
 Find ways to introduce vocabulary exercises. For example, the Toastmasters Club has a practice of 
introducing, explaining, and encouraging correct use of a new word each meeting. This may be 
adopted as a daily classroom activity. 
– 6 –
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
Question 4 
Again in this examination sitting, the story based on the picture was the one which most candidates 
attempted. Unlike last year, this year’s stories were the best done of the choices. Generally candidates 
managed to successfully incorporate the stimulus into their responses. Answers ranged from simple stories 
of a haunted house to some attempts at metaphor and personification. 
Question 5 
This was the second choice of the narratives, and was more challenging. Though the idea of music and a 
party attracted candidates’ attention, their answers were less successful and less imaginative. Answers were 
less sure as some candidates could not determine whether to focus on the mistake, or the hesitation. Only a 
few combined the two successfully. Many spent the time describing a situation leading up to the decision or 
mistake, and were ineffective in structuring satisfactory endings, often petering out into simple, predictable 
and anti-climactic outcomes. 
Question 6 
The stimulus given in this year’s paper read: “When the fishermen finally reached the shore, what greeted 
them was nothing that they could have described.” The focus of this stimulus was the shore. There is room 
in this stimulus for the candidate to spend some time describing what was experienced before reaching the 
shore, in order to emphasize the unimaginable nature of the actual beach, which must also be described
(i.e.: visual detail given). In fact, the wording made the beach scene the area of greater importance, but 
candidates did not seem to recognize this. In addition, what was seen (described) on the beach could have 
been negative or positive, as the candidate chose. The problem is that the candidates need to be taught how 
to analyse, then encouraged to use the analytical skills to interpret what is said or not said, required or
not required, in a stimulus; and through the analysis to find the focus. Otherwise they could (and did) 
misapply their time and energy. 
Among the problems noted this year were: 
 Low level of ability to differentiate between a descriptive essay and a story. In fact, the number and 
quality of responses to this option indicated a regression from the standard achieved in the past two 
years. 
 Fewer candidates showed an understanding of the requirements of a descriptive essay. They failed to 
see the accumulation of details in order to give a picture, and settled, instead, for vague 
generalizations. 
 The organization was weak, so that many candidates were unable to master the spatial aspect: moving 
left to right, top to bottom, panning, etc.) 
 Rather than say what could be seen, and involve the audience in seeing the details so they might react 
on a personal level, candidates told the audience what to feel (e.g.: … it was warm and sunny … 
instead of … people were dressed in as little as was allowed, short shorts, sleeveless shirts, old ladies 
carried umbrellas…) 
 Candidates were trapped in the concept of time and event (in the narrative ‘… and then, and then …”)
– 7 –
Recommendations for Teaching 
 Our students, born and raised in a visual age, may have reached a point where they no longer see 
what is around them. In addition, they are blasted almost continually with loud and demanding 
sound. There are many practical reasons for learning to ‘see’ and describe.
 This suggestion invites the teacher to conduct brief but enjoyable training sessions:
 Provide students with only the sounds, then ask them to supply the visual, first orally, then 
in writing. Use a radio play, or a song, for instance.
 Have students, working in small groups, blindfold each other and then experience 
something.
 Present students with jumbled details, then have them arrange the material logically, and 
account for their choices.
 A writer may make use of multiple strategies to develop a piece of writing, and students need (i) to 
recognize these techniques and (ii) to understand how to identify the piece according to the 
predominant purpose and style. For example, an argumentative essay may use some definition or 
narrative to help in making a point clear. Narratives very often use description, in order to establish 
‘setting’ in time and place. Students must be encouraged to see the differences when a piece of 
writing is dedicated to story, OR to description.
 Teachers are encouraged to use literature (the texts set for English B, for instance) to help students 
to recognize and create different kinds of writing.
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
The questions were appropriate for the age level of the candidates, and examiners generally thought they 
were apt choices as they allowed candidates the opportunity to express their reasoned views and arguments 
on topical issues, bearing in mind that candidates range from those of middle to upper high school age to 
those who are at the age of adult maturity. 
Question 7 
Responses to Question 7 suggested that it offered candidates a manageable challenge in terms of ideas for or 
against (i) the claim that homeless people are a nuisance, and (ii) that the homeless should be forced into 
government-provided housing. Candidates had many ideas, but the challenge lay in their ability or inability 
to: 
 recognize the aspects of the discussion 
 organize their thoughts effectively to cover all aspects of the discussion 
 organize their ideas for the best strategic impact (move from stronger to weaker or from weaker to 
stronger points) 
 link their ideas and achieve cohesion 
 muster syntax and vocabulary well enough to express themselves clearly. 
Less able candidates understood the concept of ‘nuisance’, but then devoted the entire essay to establishing 
that nuisance element, abruptly attaching the ‘forced into …housing’ as a conclusion. In many instances 
candidates failed to support their claims, and relied instead on repetition of opinions. 
Question 8 
Question 8 required that candidates recognize the nature and purpose of rules generally, and of school rules 
in particular. It also required that they have some understanding of freedom generally, and a consciousness 
of how personal freedom fits into the broader issue. The problem of inadequate vocabulary negatively 
– 8 –
affected understanding and responses to the prompt. Particular areas included the meanings of ‘violate’ and 
‘personal freedom’. Violate was often interpreted as ‘annoy’. Many candidates took the statement 
personally or very narrowly, and related incidents of personal affront or negative reactions by schoolmates, 
rather than explore the concept of violate. Most often the focus was on specific rules in specific schools. 
Recommendations for Teaching 
 In responding to arguments, whether in real life or in examination essays, it is necessary to address all 
aspects of the argument that are put forward; not answering a specific aspect suggests that the candidate 
has a problem with that specific aspect. In any case, answers to arguments in examination essays have 
to be comprehensive since marks are assigned to the different parts of a question. In other words, if the 
candidate omits part of a question, he/she automatically loses the marks assigned to it. 
 While this section of the paper often gives topics which are of immediate interest to teenagers, 
candidates also need to keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interests. 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have prepared to write their argumentative essay along 
specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while some students do 
benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the risk that competent and 
even superior candidates will be forced into a mould which affects their expression and development 
negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and provide them with a variety of ways 
to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
 Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially in 
the proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, 
contrast and concession. Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by 
contrast’ and ‘accordingly’ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in 
fragments, as they often are. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2015
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2015 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance in English A in January 2015 was fair. This was reflected by an increase in the 
percentage of candidates achieving acceptable grades. Approximately 56 per cent of candidates 
achieved Grades I–III, an improvement on January 2014 when the percentage of candidates who 
achieved this level of performance was approximately 52 per cent. The percentage of candidates 
who achieved Grade I increased from approximately seven per cent in 2014 to eight per cent in 
2015. 
Improved performance was evidenced on Profile 2, Expression. While overall there was an 
improvement in the quality of responses on questions on Paper 02, candidates continue to 
experience difficulty on the Expression profile. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice
Performance on Paper 01 was very fair with a mean score of 57 per cent. Nineteen per cent of the 
candidates achieved Grade I on this paper while 80 per cent of candidates achieved acceptable 
grades, I–III. Candidates were generally able to recognize facts stated explicitly and to extract 
specific and implied information. Items based on word and sentence meaning were generally well 
done. Items requiring recognition of errors in usage, inappropriate grammar or vocabulary in 
sentences were also generally well done. In the comprehension items weakness was noted in some 
candidates’ ability to evaluate the effectiveness of language devices used and the appropriateness of 
different forms and structures used to achieve the author’s intention. This was especially evident in 
Items 21–30, which were based on a poem. Items 23–26 and 29 assessed candidates’ knowledge of 
metaphor, tone, mood and connotative meaning. Items 40–47 assessed candidates’ ability to obtain 
information accurately from informational text. Candidates were expected to understand the 
writer’s intention, make comparisons and sequence information.
Paper 02 – Free Response
Section A: Summary
Question 1
In Section A candidates are required to demonstrate the ability to understand the written text, 
organize information and express the ideas clearly. To reiterate the message of past reports, the 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific 
discussions, analyses) suitable to the secondary school age group. The skills of selection and 
concise expression are targeted and specific aims are detailed in the syllabus under Understanding 
(a) and (b) and Expression (a), (b), (c). Included in the syllabus is the following advice: Summaries 
require economy of language, the careful selection of the relevant main ideas, and the preservation 
of the intention of the original.
The passage selected for January 2015 instructed candidates to read an article entitled ‘Our History, 
Our Future’ and write a summary of it not exceeding 120 words. Candidates’ responses were 
generally below average. The mean on this question was 12 out of 30. Some candidates’ answers 
suggested that they understood that man’s past mistakes are being repeated and that these could be 
avoided but they copied the words/sentences which expressed such. The majority was unable to 
say how to avoid the mistakes without using the words from the passage. In fact, most candidates 
- 3 -
began and completed their summaries using the same vocabulary presented in the passage. Many 
candidates actually wrote ‘summaries’ with six paragraphs (the same number as the original). This 
method of summarizing (slavishly following the structure of the original) prevented them from 
making appropriate links between ideas and resulted in repetition/extensive ‘lifting’. Many 
candidates also rewrote the examples and the quotation with a few ending their summary with the 
latter. There were also instances where candidates simply copied the passage until the word limit 
had been reached.
Apart from the language weakness, candidates demonstrated weakness in selecting the crucial 
elements and were hampered by a lack of vocabulary. Other persistent problems come from the 
assumption that the first sentence in a paragraph must be the topic sentence.
The points which should have been included are:
 History is full of valuable information, not only about events and dates, but also about 
behaviours and the consequences of those behaviours.
 People usually learn about history but do not learn from it, so they make the same mistakes 
of earlier generations.
 In order to learn from history, the reader must go beyond superficial study, must analyse 
and so learn from the earlier mistakes and best practices.
 Good research skills applied to history can lead to the discovery of effective strategies to 
be used in business and social development.
 Since history records human and cultural attitudes and behaviours, individual and national 
expectations, societies’ strengths and weaknesses, a study of it shows how to avoid conflict 
in a variety of contexts.
Sample Summary 1
History provides considerable information about dates and events, but also stores knowledge and 
examples which we, as individuals and leaders, can use in our daily personal and business lives. 
To get the benefit from history, we need to approach it inquiringly and analytically. We are then 
able to recognize, understand and appreciate character, patterns of behaviour, cultural 
peculiarities, social conditions and needs and responses. We also have a chance to understand 
more of the interpersonal and intrapersonal factors relating to managing people, our businesses, 
and our lives. When we fail to study history appreciatively we miss the warnings, repeat the 
experiments and bad practices, and get the same disastrous results as our predecessors did.
114 words
Sample Summary 2
History books contain useful knowledge of events, situations and human interactions. If we really 
want to reap the benefits of this knowledge, we need to use an analytical approach to the study of 
history. We will find that it gives us blueprints and advice on how to alleviate a wide range of 
negative human activity. We can avoid global and personal conflicts while we improve our 
business practices and our social and cultural interaction, both locally and globally. In short, the 
application of history’s lessons can be of great benefit to man’s progress. Instead, we learn only the 
contents of history and continue to make the same mistakes our ancestors did, so that history 
repeats itself.
116 words
- 4 -
Sample Summary 3
History contains a wealth of information relating to dates and events. In addition, not only are 
examples of human behaviours and actions recorded, but also the results of such; yet man has the 
tendency to simply learn history without using the analytical approach to it that would enable him 
to learn from it. As a result, the patterns that history has created are often unnoticed. By failing to 
make use of the positive insights provided, the mistakes of previous generations are repeated. The 
application of the analytical approach produces guidance for human interaction. Through it we 
avoid cultural and social conflicts. The result should be an improvement in human relations in all 
spheres.
113 words
Recommendations
Comprehension skills need to be reinforced and students should
 be exposed to a wide range of expository passages and be guided in analysing text 
structures and modes of development
 receive more practice in expressing what they read in their own words
 be given exercises using transitional words
 be encouraged to complete classroom exercises within the specific timeframe and word 
limit. Students should also be penalized for ‘lifting’.
Notes and Suggested Activities (specifically pages 6 –12) of the syllabus, will help both teacher and 
student to identify and hone summary skills. Strong support is also given in the new Nelson 
Thorne’s CXC English A Study Guide.
Section B: Understanding
Questions 2 and 3
These questions are designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one 
expository. The skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) 
(pages 2–3). Each passage has a different focus: in the expository type of passage the objectives are 
outlined in (a) and (b); in the literary, the greater number of questions satisfy Understanding (c). 
The results for Question 2 strongly suggest that reading and analysing writing of a literary nature 
needs to be given more attention. Pages 12–14 of the syllabus should be invaluable. Where 
questions require information obvious in the text, candidates gain marks, but fail to read between 
the lines, understand inference, purpose, techniques, and connotative language. 
Question 2 
The performance of candidates on this comprehension question indicated a wide range of abilities 
in comprehension, with scores ranging from 1 to 15. The mean on the question was 7 out of 15. 
While many candidates were able to correctly quote the phrase required in Part (a) (ii), there was 
the tendency to quote the entire sentence given in line 5, clearly indicating that candidates have not 
mastered the skill of ‘quoting a phrase.’
The passage set was an extract from the (Caribbean) novel The Leopard by Victor Reid. It is a 
reflective piece in which, through the night, the protagonist experiences a rainstorm and compares 
its destructiveness with the behaviours of a woman. In contrast, as morning comes and the storm is 
ended, he uses the metaphor of a fun-filled golden ball rising and breaking over the land.
- 5 -
Many candidates were able to identify the impact of the storm on the environment as requested in 
Part (c) (i). They were also able to accurately identify the words or phrases which conveyed this 
idea.
From the response of candidates, the most challenging question was Part (d). For this question, 
candidates were required to identify the difference in mood between paragraphs 1 and 3. Many 
could not use the terminology expected: dreary/dull; bright/hopeful. In some cases, instead of 
identifying the mood of the paragraphs, candidates reverted to identifying the mood of the writer.
Part (e) required candidates to quote pieces of evidence that suggested different times of the day. 
Some candidates were able to accurately quote the evidence, but others experienced difficulty 
producing answers that focused on the same time of the day, for example, morning.
Another challenging question was Part (f) (ii) where candidates were asked to identify another 
phrase in the passage which conveyed the same idea as “beyond the limits of the land”. Many got 
this incorrect. In other cases the question was not even attempted, suggesting generally a 
discomfort with metaphorical language.
The performance of candidates on the question indicates the need for some level of integration: 
using literature in the language classroom. It is evident that when candidates are asked to identify 
terms that are all too familiar in literature classrooms, those without that experience perform 
poorly.
Question 3
This passage examined the advantages and disadvantages of the increasing use of information 
technology in industry and commerce. It also looked at the impact on social and community life. 
It argued that in spite of the benefits, people and communities are vital and efforts must be made to 
maintain the connections between people. While Parts (a) and (c) which assessed the ability to 
retrieve information explicitly stated were answered correctly by the majority of candidates, Parts
(b), (d) and (f) were not well done as many candidates did not seem to interpret these questions 
correctly. The term ‘remote access’ used in Part (b) did not seem to be understood by some 
candidates while the writer’s ‘attitude’ was also not deduced by many candidates in answering Part
(d). The ‘effect’ the writer wanted to achieve by using the word ‘yet’ in Part (e) was another 
question not well answered. Part (f) required an inference which was not made in many instances,
while Part (h) required candidates to draw a conclusion. The mean on this question was 8 out of 15.
Section C: Story Writing
Of the three questions in this section, most candidates attempted Question 5. Question 6 was the 
least popular. A few very good responses were generated from all topics, but most responses were 
quite mundane. The use of Standard English continues to be a challenge for too many candidates, 
with obvious interference from the dialects used in the region. Many stories were poor in using the 
elements of story writing. Candidates must be encouraged to take note of the rubric especially as it 
applies to the way the stimulus is to be used, and to the length of responses.
Question 4
This question used a picture of a clearly malnourished dog about to be captured by a group of ‘dog￾catchers’. The picture focused on the animal and the devices used to catch it. Only the legs and 
arms of the catchers were visible. The stimulus offered candidates an opportunity to fully display 
- 6 -
the elements of short story writing and many candidates did a fair job of developing a story line and 
some attempts at characterization were quite good. The stimulus was used to present stories from 
several perspectives, for example, the dog, the dog-catcher or an animal lover. In many instances 
the conflict situation was clearly developed and a resolution established. The language component, 
although quite good in instances, revealed many areas of concern. The mean on this question was 
12 out of 35.
Question 5
The stimulus for Question 5 introduced a male, sitting on a bus between two persons who said they 
were his parents, and feeling that ‘something just did not feel right’. The candidates could have 
chosen any age group for the protagonist. A story which included internal 
conflict/reflection/suspense, and even comedy, was possible. Responses ranged from demonstrating 
incompetence to suggesting superiority although there were very few at the upper level. Candidates 
used the stimulus to varying degrees of effectiveness with most responses falling in the ‘suggesting 
competence’ range. Some candidates seemed to have difficulty linking the second part of the 
stimulus ‘something just did not feel right’ with the first part ‘two persons who said they were his 
parents’. The mean on this question was 17 out of 35.
Question 6
Descriptive writing continues to be a challenge for a large number of candidates. Pieces which 
focus on narration with only incidental description still form a major part of the submissions.
Candidates should be encouraged to show the situation to the audience through the details they 
give. Much work needs to be done in helping students to use structure and sequence to produce a 
good description. Candidates may be further encouraged and motivated if they are helped to see 
that the ability to describe is a vital aspect of our lives, part of our mechanism for self-protection. 
Observation, attention to details, and logical movement are relevant skills to be developed. The 
mean on this question was 15 out of 35.
Section D: Argument
Candidates were comfortable with these topics, and some very good work emerged. Still too many 
responses lacked adequate and well-reasoned arguments/points and the requisite and appropriate 
argumentative devices to convince or persuade their audience. 
Question 7
This topic was within the range of candidates’ experience so they were able to generate clear points 
for their responses. They were able to elaborate on these points thus providing the needed support 
for the topic. In addition to presenting sound arguments, many candidates were able to 
acknowledge and refute the counterarguments in a logical and mature way. For example, 
candidates argued that some of the benefits of the school setting include developing conflict 
resolution skills and team building while at the same time enabling individuals to develop a sense 
of independence. These responses showed that there was some awareness of the genre of writing 
that they were asked to address.
CSEC®
English
Caribbean Examinations Council
SYLLABUS 
SPECIMEN PAPER 
MARK SCHEME
SUBJECT REPORTS
EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish
Macmillan Education 
4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW 
A division of Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Companies and representatives throughout the world 
www.macmillan-caribbean.com 
ISBN 978-0-230-48179-4 AER
© Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC®
) 2015
www.cxc.org
www.cxc-store.com 
The author has asserted their right to be identified as the author of this work in accordance with the 
Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988. 
First published 2014
This revised version published 2015 
Permission to copy 
The material in this book is copyright. However, the publisher grants permission for copies to be 
made without fee. Individuals may make copies for their own use or for use by classes of which they 
are in charge; institutions may make copies for use within and by the staff and students of that 
institution. For copying in any other circumstances, prior permission in writing must be obtained 
from Macmillan Publishers Limited. Under no circumstances may the material in this book be used, 
in part or in its entirety, for commercial gain. It must not be sold in any format. 
Designed by Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Cover design by Macmillan Publishers Limited and Red Giraffe 
CSEC® English A and English B Free Resources 
LIST OF CONTENTS 
CSEC® English A & B Syllabus Extract 4
CSEC® English A & B Syllabus 5
CSEC® English A Specimen Papers 
Multiple Choice 66
Paper 02 81
CSEC® English A Mark Schemes 
Multiple Choice 90
Paper 02 91
CSEC® English A Subject Reports: 
2004 Subject Report (January) 106
2004 Subject Report (June) 112
2005 Subject Report (June) 120
2006 Subject Report (June) 133
2007 Subject Report (June) 148
2008 Subject Report (June) 162
2009 Subject Report (June) 179
2010 Subject Report (January) 191
2010 Subject Report (June) 200
2011 Subject Report (January) 206
2011 Subject Report (June) 214
2012 Subject Report (January) 219
2012 Subject Report (June) 225
2013 Subject Report (January) 230
2013 Subject Report (June) 236
2013 Profile Cut-Offs 249
2013 Table of Specifications 251
2014 Subject Report (January) 253
2014 Subject Report (June) 259
2015 Subject Report (January) 267
CSEC® English B Specimen Papers: 
Paper 01 274
Paper 02 281
CSEC ® English B Mark Schemes: 
Paper 01 287
Paper 02 293
CSEC ® English B Subject Reports: 
2004 Subject Report (June) 330
2005 Subject Report (June) 339
2006 Subject Report (June) 347
2007 Subject Report (June) 355
2008 Subject Report (June) 365
2009 Subject Report (June) 375
2010 Subject Report (June) 385
2011 Subject Report (January) 394
2011 Subject Report (June) 404
2012 Subject Report (January) 414
2012 Subject Report (June) 425
2013 Subject Report (January) 437
2013 Subject Report (June) 450
2014 Subject Report (January) 462
2014 Subject Report (June) 476
2015 Subject Report (January) 488
English A & B
Students who do the English course will explore receptively and expressively three 
major literary modes – Drama, Poetry, and Prose Fiction – in order to become aware 
of the many functions and purposes of language. In doing so, they will discover that 
the four facets of language arts – namely listening, speaking, reading and writing – are 
closely linked together and are interdependent.
Syllabus objectives are organised under understanding and expression in order to guide 
curriculum development, to give meaning to a teaching programme and to define an 
assessment scheme that reinforces an English syllabus which has been conceived as 
an integrated approach to language teaching and which enables students to appreciate 
the holistic nature of language learning.
The English syllabus is organised for examination as English A and English B. The 
former emphasises the development of oral and written language skills among students 
through a variety of strategies. The latter provides opportunities for students to explore 
and respond critically to specific literary texts as they observe and appreciate the 
author’s craft.
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate
CSEC
ENGLISH
SYLLABUS
Effective for examinations from May/June 2012
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
Published by the Caribbean Examinations Council
© 2010, Caribbean Examinations Council 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means electronic, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior 
permission of the author or publisher.
Correspondence related to the syllabus should be addressed to:
The Pro-Registrar
Caribbean Examinations Council
Caenwood Centre
37 Arnold Road, Kingston 5, Jamaica, W.I.
Telephone: (876) 630-5200
Facsimile Number: (876) 967-4972
E-mail address: cxcwzo@cxc.org
Website: www.cxc.org
Copyright © 2009, by Caribbean Examinations Council
The Garrison, St Michael BB14038, Barbados
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
 
Content 
RATIONALE.................................................................................................................................... 1 
AIMS.................................................................................................................................................. 1 
SKILLS AND ABILITIES TO BE ASSESSED ............................................................................. 2 
RECOMMENDED TIME ALLOCATION .................................................................................. 4 
ENGLISH A AND B - NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES ......................................... 5 
THE ENGLISH A EXAMINATION.............................................................................................. 18 
- OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH A 
THE ENGLISH B EXAMINATION.............................................................................................. 22 
- OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH B
PRESCRIBED TEXTS FOR ENGLISH B..................................................................................... 29 
SUGGESTED READING LIST FOR ENGLISH ........................................................................ 32 
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 57
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
AMENDMENTS ARE INDICATED BY ITALICS
REVISED 1997, 2003 AND 2009 
Please check the website, www.cxc.org for updates on CXC’s syllabuses
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
English Syllabus 
♦ RATIONALE
The ability of students to understand fully what they listen to, read and view as well as to express 
themselves clearly in speech and in writing are critical factors in managing their personal and social well￾being. The study of language and literature provides opportunity for students to develop competence and 
confidence in speaking and writing for personal and public purposes in everyday activities. It also seeks to 
develop students' ability to read and enjoy literary texts, to explore social and moral issues, and to evaluate 
the way language grows, develops and is used. The study of language and literature also recognises the dynamics of 
viewing and valuing as students respond critically to the wealth of electronic media which help to shape our perceptions 
at conscious and unconscious levels. 
Students explore receptively and expressively three major literary genres, Drama, Poetry, and Prose Fiction, 
in order to become aware of the many functions and purposes of language. In doing so, they discover that 
the five facets of the language arts, namely, listening, speaking, reading, writing and viewing, are closely 
linked together and are interdependent. 
Syllabus objectives are organised under understanding and expression in order to guide curriculum 
development, to give meaning to the teaching programme and to define an assessment scheme that
reinforces an English syllabus which has been conceived as an integrated approach to language teaching. 
This enables students to appreciate the holistic nature of language learning.
The English syllabus is organised for examination as English A and English B. The former emphasises the 
development of students’ oral and written language skills among students through a variety of strategies. 
The latter provides opportunities for students to explore and respond critically to specific literary texts as 
they observe and appreciate the author’s craft.
♦ AIMS
The syllabus aims to:
1. develop the ability to use the spoken and written language, Caribbean Standard English (CSE), with precision, 
clarity and grammatical correctness;
2. develop the ability to use, understand and respond to spoken and written Caribbean Standard English; 
3. develop the ability to use language effectively for communicating in a variety of contexts: social, academic and 
professional; 
4. develop the ability to give effective articulation to experience (real or imagined);
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 1 
5. promote in students a willingness and ability to inform themselves about, and to contribute reasoned opinions on 
social issues;
6. promote a lasting appreciation of the diversity of purposes for which language varieties are used;
7. promote an understanding and appreciation of the place and value of the varieties of English and of the dialects 
and creoles of the Caribbean and other regions in different social and cultural contexts; 
8. develop a critical awareness of the language devices used to persuade;
9. develop an ability to respond to literature for pleasure, to recognise and respond to the writer’s craft, and to make 
sensitive appraisals of value judgments and other concepts expressed in literature;
10. develop knowledge of the various sources of information and a desire to use these for the student’s own 
enlightenment; while recognising the importance of acknowledging the contribution of such sources to their own 
ideas; 
11. develop the capacity to assess the reliability of sources including those available on the Internet. 
♦ SKILLS AND ABILITIES TO BE ASSESSED
The aims stated above can be attained by developing the related skills in the student. These skills are 
categorised under the two broad headings: Understanding, the decoding and interpreting of messages through 
the analysis of the language structures and devices used in any given context, and Expression, the conveying of 
meaning through the selection of language structures and devices appropriate to each specific context. 
Performance will be reported under the profile dimensions Understanding and Expression. 
1. Understanding
The ability to:
(a) understand meaning conveyed (both in listening and in reading) through word choice and 
grammar, and (in reading) through punctuation and paragraphing;
(b) obtain information accurately, as demonstrated in the ability to:
(i) recognise facts stated explicitly;
(ii) extract specific information from what is read or heard;
(iii) extract implied information;
(iv) identify stated or implied time sequence;
(v) draw valid conclusions and inferences from information presented;
(vi) recognise cause and effect relationships;
(vii) identify main and subordinate ideas and trace their development;
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 2 
(viii) recognise the difference between denotative and connotative language;
(ix) treat with passages whose main purpose is informative (expository) as opposed to 
literary or persuasive;
(x) interpret and respond to tables and pictorial communication, such as diagrams, 
conventional signs and symbols;
(c) grasp insights from reading literature and demonstrating the ability to:
(i) deduce reasons and motives for particular spoken and written communication (other 
than those with an overt persuasive intent);
(ii) appreciate the appropriateness of different uses of tone, mood, register, code and 
style in talks and speeches, in non-literary forms including scientific or technical 
writing, and in literary forms (prose, verse and drama), in relation to the author’s 
intention;
(iii) detect connotations in the use of words and in the presentation of ideas and 
distinguish between connotative and denotative meaning;
(iv) detect and assess the apt use of devices such as pun, innuendo, exaggeration, irony 
and symbolism;
(v) recognise and respond to the appropriateness of the means, including form and 
structure, used by a speaker, director or author to achieve the intended effect of a 
talk or speech, letter, article or essay, poem, novel, story or play;
(vi) visualise the situation, attitudes, mood and setting of a play and appreciate how they 
influence the actions and interaction of actors in the performance of that play;
(vii) recognise implicit themes;
(viii) respond to West Indian and other literature in English (novels, short stories, poems 
and plays): recognise elements of the writer’s craft; respond to writers’ evocation of feelings, 
moods, atmosphere; making critical appraisal of values and concepts expressed in 
literature, and relate these to everyday living;
(d) recognise and evaluate opinion expressed in various forms as demonstrated in the ability to:
(i) distinguish factual statements from unsupported opinion statements;
(ii) detect connotations in the use of words and the presentation of ideas;
(iii) evaluate the effectiveness of language devices used to persuade;
(iv) recognise the range of techniques of persuasion employed in social intercourse and 
in the mass media, and assess the persuasive effects.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 3 
2. Expression
The ability to:
(a) use appropriate diction, grammatical forms (both in speaking and in writing) and suitable 
punctuation and paragraphing to convey meaning clearly and with facility;
(b) communicate factual information clearly, concisely and adequately in giving oral and written 
instructions, reports, summaries, and expositions;
(c) give aesthetic satisfaction to others in personal, creative and imaginative language by:
(i) organising and sequencing ideas to communicate emotional and imaginative 
interpretations of experience;
(ii) using language (tone, mood, register, code and style) appropriate to particular 
situations and contexts;
(d) communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or 
dissuades effectively. This will involve the ability to: 
(i) present reasoned evaluative comments on proposals and situations of various kinds 
in language that is clear and appropriate to the occasion;
(ii) demonstrate the ability to employ, wherever necessary, a range of persuasive 
techniques for emotional impact;
(iii) present a logical argument using justifiable techniques related to sound oral and 
written debate.
♦ RECOMMENDED TIME ALLOCATION
It is recommended that in order to satisfy the requirements of the English A and English B examinations, a 
minimum of six sessions should be allocated to English A and four to English B per week. However, it is 
recognised that students and teachers operate in a wide variety of situations and under an equally wide variety 
of conditions. It is important that individual institutions develop an allocation of time taking the following 
into consideration:
(i) language competence levels of students at point of entry into the examination class;
(ii) availability of human and other resources;
(iii) learning styles of students;
(iv) school culture;
(v) normal timetable concerns; and 
(vi) balance among skills needed in English A and English B.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 4 
CONTENT
The choice of material to be used in the classroom will be guided by both the language needs of daily living 
and the need of the students to develop the skills and insights necessary if they are to derive satisfaction from 
novels, stories, poems and plays. The approach in this syllabus calls for emphasis on the exposure of students 
to literature, not to the learning of facts about literary theory.
A reading list is included in the syllabus to offer help to schools in choosing class texts to develop the ability to 
enjoy literature. It is a list of suggested reading, not prescribed reading. It offers a guide to the range of 
material that is suitable for particular groups of students. Schools are encouraged to create situations which 
lead to wide reading by students.
There will, of course, be differences from territory to territory and even from school to school, so the 
recommendations must not be taken as binding in any way. It is hoped that students will be encouraged to 
read widely within the range of titles suggested both by the list and by the teacher’s own additions to it, and 
that class sessions and written assignments will be geared to stimulate and reward this extra reading of, and 
interest in literature. 
The reading list includes a number of reference texts on the teaching of drama. The approach to drama 
implicit in the syllabus places the emphasis on the use of activities such as miming, improvisations, the reading 
and acting of plays in the classroom that would help in the development of self awareness and understanding 
of others. The texts included in the suggested reading list will provide guidance in implementing this aspect 
of the drama programme, particularly in the first three years of secondary schooling.
♦ ENGLISH A AND B - NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES 
(FORMS 1 - 5)
Communicative competence is a critical issue in any classroom and is the focus of the aims outlined earlier in 
this syllabus. Students will be expected to demonstrate good control of the mechanisms of language, write 
good, clear prose, and to communicate easily, precisely and fluently. It is a sound instructional principle to 
practice the skills required to achieve these features within situations that simulate the social contexts as nearly 
as possible. The importance of the oral aspects of English A should be emphasised, even though these are 
currently not assessed by the Council. Schools are, therefore, encouraged to engage the oral aspects of English 
A. 
It is recommended that teachers in all subjects ensure that the English language competence of their students 
is satisfactory. With this in mind, it is suggested that teachers of English should provide guidance to teachers 
of other subjects with respect to the quality of English expected to be displayed, and that 5% of the marks for 
any assignment should be allocated to the quality of the language used in presenting the assignment, oral or 
written.
Suggested teaching activities are intended to guide teachers into a full understanding of the objectives of the 
syllabus, while offering ideas for both teaching and assessment activities. This list of activities is not 
prescribed, nor is it exhaustive.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 5 
ENGLISH A and B – NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
Understanding (a) – Grammar and Mechanics
Students should be able to:
1. explain meaning 
conveyed (both in 
listening and in 
reading) through 
word choice and 
grammar, and (in 
reading) through 
punctuation and 
paragraphing.
Word choice: 
formal, informal, non￾standard, Creole, literal, 
figurative use, fixed phrases, 
synonyms, antonyms, 
homonyms.
Wide reading (class 
library); shared newspaper, 
assessing alternative 
Internet sites, listening to 
effective speeches, oral 
skills; use of dictionary 
and thesaurus including e￾dictionary and e-thesaurus; 
word puzzles, word-a-day, 
vocabulary notebooks, word￾attack skills.
Cloze tests
Sentence completion
Synonyms
Antonyms
Definitions
Grammar: 
a. syntax – the ways in 
which words are 
ordered and connected 
to form phrases or 
sentences with 
particular meaning.
 
Grammar check in word 
processing. 
Explicit language 
comparison and 
substitution and 
restructuring drills (as in 
second-language teaching); 
critical listening and 
reading exercises; 
identifying sentence 
patterns, analysing fact, 
evaluating arguments and 
opinions.
Study and discussion of video 
extracts relating to (a) 
standard English spoken by 
Caribbean persons (b) by non 
Caribbean persons or (c) by 
Caribbean persons with non￾Caribbean influences, for 
example, (note word choice, 
check for agreement in 
grammar, common and 
different aspects of language 
use.
 
Listening and reading 
comprehension exercises, with 
answers dependent on the 
understanding of particular 
forms, structures, patterns.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 6 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
b. morphology – the ways 
in which the form of 
words and fixed phrases, 
and the changes made to 
them affect meaning.
Exercises to differentiate 
marking of number, 
possession, verb tense, 
adjective degree, pronoun 
reference, and word￾building. Use of word￾processing tools for editing.
As overleaf. 
 
Punctuation: 
recognition of punctuation 
marks and their effect on 
meaning – capital letter, 
question mark, exclamation 
mark, full stop, semi-colon, 
comma, colon, apostrophe, 
quotation marks, brackets, 
dash, hyphen, ellipsis.
Critical discussion and 
correction of punctuation 
used in selected and 
prepared material;
dictation; reading aloud to 
identify contribution of 
punctuation to meaning. 
Unpunctuated passages 
used to focus on links 
between punctuation and 
interpretation.
Dictation
Reading aloud to show 
appreciation of punctuation; 
Explaining the effects of 
punctuation marks in context; 
Paragraphing Justifying choice of topic 
sentences in paragraphs 
read or heard; making an 
outline from a given 
(magazine) article; 
evaluating colleague’s 
paragraphs, creation of 
dialogue and role play and 
other controlled oral 
activity, impromptu 
speech.
Using written material:
- identifying topic 
sentences; 
- explaining the effect of 
paragraphing in passages 
with and without 
dialogue; 
- similar exercises using 
oral materials or video;
Expression (a) – Grammar and Mechanics
Students should be able to:
1. use appropriate 
diction and 
grammatical forms 
(both in speaking 
and in writing) and 
suitable 
punctuation and 
paragraphing to 
convey meaning 
clearly and with 
facility.
Diction: 
appropriate diction 
matches word choice and
style to the purpose,
situation, audience and 
content of the written or 
spoken discourse; accurate 
use of words, fixed phrases, 
synonyms and antonyms is 
expected.
Use of dictionary and 
thesaurus including audio 
samples on e-dictionaries; 
creating word puzzles; 
Scrabble; word-a-day; 
vocabulary notebooks; 
rewriting items for 
different purpose and 
situation and audience; 
oral and written sentence 
completion and cloze 
exercises. 
Role play: (1) various 
professions 
(2) use of hierarchy -
Sentence completion and cloze 
tests
Word substitution
Structured writing or speaking 
task to test appropriate diction 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 7 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
(student/principal), worker 
/superior
(3) other relationships: 
civilian/law officer; sales 
clerk/customer.
Grammar: 
adjustment of grammatical form 
for flexibility as appropriate 
to audience and context, 
sentence functions
(statement, question) and
types (simple, compound), 
for accuracy: number, 
identification of subject, 
concord, pronoun reference, 
possessives, sequence of 
tenses.
Use of grammar check on 
Microsoft Word.
Practice in appropriately 
structuring and altering 
statements, questions; 
synthesis; building 
complex and compound, 
sentences. 
Oral, then written 
language comparison and 
restructuring drills; proof￾reading exercises to 
identify and correct errors 
of number, concord, 
reported speech, journal 
writing, oral interviews, 
impromptu speeches. 
Extended writing task to test 
use of suitable variety of 
sentences 
Synthesis 
Extended writing task to test 
accuracy in the statement of 
number and concord. Error 
recognition; error correction; 
Changing direct to reported 
speech; 
Punctuation: 
appropriate use of capital 
letter, questions mark, 
exclamation mark, full stop, 
semi-colon, comma, colon, 
apostrophe, quotation marks,
brackets, dash, hyphen, 
ellipsis.
Reading aloud; giving, 
taking dictation; proof￾reading exercises.
Extended writing task to test 
appropriate use of necessary 
punctuation marks
Dictation
Correcting an unpunctuated 
passage;
Paragraphing: 
logical division of 
continuous writing into 
coherent paragraphs; 
conventions of paragraphing 
shown in writing dialogue.
 
Outlining a composition 
by grouping brainstormed 
(or jumbled) ideas; oral 
and written expanding of 
topic sentences into 
paragraphs; adding 
properly sequenced 
paragraphs to create a 
longer work. Semantic 
mapping.
Listening to speech to 
recognise how the flow of 
ideas helps/hinders audience 
understanding and suggests 
organisation.
Listening to speech to note 
Extended writing task (essay, 
short story) to test effective 
paragraphing; 
Dividing passage into 
paragraphs; 
Correcting faulty paragraphing;
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 8 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
how natural chunking, 
pausing, voice change, suggest 
punctuation.
Understanding (b) – Informative Discourse
Students should be able to extract information accurately. This involves the ability to:
1. recognise facts 
stated explicitly;
As the first level of 
questioning, this requires a 
basic understanding of 
information presented 
directly in language to be 
taken literally.
Use of various subject 
textbooks, manuals, 
newspaper reports, 
notices, recipes, tables, 
charts, signs, maps, 
diagrams, audio and 
videotape.
Use of Internet articles on 
same/similar topics – 
analysis of views, and 
separation of facts from 
opinion.
Multiple choice, short-answer, 
oral questions re explicit 
information (read, heard or 
shown in a diagram). Who, 
what, where, when, why, how 
questions.
Following directions
2. extract specific 
information from 
what is read or 
heard;
Selection of relevant 
information, making use of 
titles, introductions, topic 
sentences, illustrations.
Note-taking; making 
outlines, summaries, 
paraphrases; given titles; 
formulating questions to 
elicit data.
Written and oral summaries, 
reports. Reporting data as 
diagrams, charts. Picking the 
outline from an article.
3. extract implied 
information;
Reading ‘between the lines’ 
(a critical skill) is used in 
interpreting information 
presented indirectly.
Making inferences from 
suitable passages, poems; 
deducing meaning of 
cartoons, and trends in 
charts, advertisement, 
other oral media and 
presentation.
Multiple choice, short-answer, 
or oral questions re implied 
information (read, heard, or 
seen in graphic).
 Listening/watching video: 
(i) make predictions based on 
speech, music, atmosphere, 
body language and on other 
behaviours (ii) study/ deduce 
character based on dress, 
behaviours, speech (iii) 
discussion on what ‘setting’ 
contributes to meaning: 
hearing and understanding, 
for example, influence of 
indoor/outdoor; social 
location, for example,
church/market.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 9 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
4. identify stated or 
implied time 
sequence;
Important for following 
instructions and for making 
good sense of information 
received in confused order, 
as in flashbacks.
Re-ordering jumbled 
directions, picture 
sequences, planning 
activities; taking minutes 
of meetings; chronological 
listing of events in 
account; identifying cue￾words (first, second, next, 
then; dates).
Assessing the clarity of 
instructions on the labels of 
commercial products.
Following instructions, 
directions. Arranging (events 
recounted, pictured) in 
sequence. Numbering logical 
sequence.
5. draw valid 
conclusions and 
inferences from 
information 
presented;
Identifying sound and 
unsound deductions in 
particular examples, and 
generalisations from samples.
Recognising faulty 
reasoning and inadequate 
or biased samples in 
prepared explanations, 
reports.
Differentiating sound from 
unsound conclusions in given 
deductions and generalisations.
6. recognise cause￾effect relationships;
To be distinguished from 
coincidence to avoid false 
conclusions.
Identifying cause and 
effect (and coincidence) in 
stories, reports of events 
and experiments.
Identifying (or predicting) 
effect of given cause (and vice 
versa) in a passage (narrative or 
expository).
7. identify main and 
subordinate ideas 
and trace their 
development;
Structure seen through 
sequence of topics of 
individual paragraphs. 
Themes of longer works.
Note-taking; book-reports; 
analysing structure of 
paragraphs, short stories, 
novels, essays, oral 
narratives. Comparing 
novel with movie version.
Making summaries, outlines of 
items read or heard. 
Identifying themes in essay, 
story.
8. recognise the 
difference between 
denotative and 
connotative 
language;
Denotative (dictionary 
meaning) for literal, 
objective understanding; 
connotative (suggesting 
feelings) for subjective, 
emotional response.
Dictionary work;
comparison of similar 
information presented in 
contrasting styles; study of 
effect of word choice on 
slant, bias in oral and 
written narratives.
Differentiating between 
denotative and connotative 
language in prepared extracts. 
Giving unbiased equivalents of 
loaded terms.
9. identify passages in 
which the main 
purpose is 
informative 
(expository) rather 
than literary or 
persuasive;
Expository: to inform, 
explain; Literary: to 
entertain, stir feeling; 
Persuasive: to convince, 
direct.
Analysis of author’s 
purpose, and intended
audience; focus on 
elements of style which 
support informative 
purpose.
Choose expository extracts 
from a mixed selection; 
identify author’s precise 
purpose and intended 
audience.
 Watch/listen for denotative 
and connotative use of key 
words discussed before start of 
viewing/listening.
 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 10
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
10. interpret and 
respond to tables 
and pictorial 
communication, 
such as diagrams, 
conventional signs 
and symbols.
Verbal information is often 
supplemented.
Analysis of tables, charts, 
signs, maps, diagrams; 
converting the 
information to verbal 
form; making inferences 
from the data. 
Recognise and discuss 
trends; make predictions.
Identify signs on maps. 
Extract data; make inferences 
from tables, charts; summarise 
data in writing.
Continuous writing exercises, 
developing what is given in the 
visual. 
Expression (b) – Informative Discourse
Students should be able to:
1. communicate 
factual information 
clearly, concisely 
and adequately, in 
giving oral 
instructions, 
reports, summaries, 
and expositions in 
appropriate 
language.
Information discourse takes
various forms: essays,
summaries, reports, 
instructions
Clarity of instructions
depends upon precise 
language and careful 
sequencing of information.
Writing instructions, 
recipes; designing 
application forms; 
explaining how to play a 
game.
Exercises in giving/following 
oral instructions.
Writing directions and 
explaining how to operate an 
appliance.
Reports are expected to be
objective, accurate, 
comprehensive and helpfully 
organised.
Giving evidence to an 
investigator; reporting 
accident; oral or written 
reports of surveys, news 
reports, minutes.
Reporting a missing person; 
Reporting on a club project; 
A media report on a sports 
event; 
Press releases.
Summaries require economy 
of language, the careful
selection of relevant main 
ideas, and the preservation 
of the intention of the 
original.
Writing telegrams, 
classified advertisements, 
resumes, minutes of a 
meeting; summarising a 
radio news item; 
condensing a passage, 
isolating the views of one 
debater.
Condensing a newspaper 
report; 
Summarising one of the topics 
in a recorded conversation; 
Writing postcards.
Expositions give information
or explanation in an ordered 
manner, with supporting 
evidence for each element.
Writing notices, job 
applications, expository 
essays, completing forms, 
explaining how things 
work; preparing notes for 
informational talks.
Making oral reports on 
Describing yourself to a pen 
pal; 
explaining how a sewing 
machine or car engine works; 
Expository essays, for example: 
Outlining two main problems of 
youth today.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 11
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
set/observed activities; giving 
reasoned responses to 
situations; giving 
reports/assessing activities to 
be delivered in limited time 
and words.
Vocabulary “games” relevant 
to specific situations.
The appropriateness of 
language for communicating 
factual information is 
largely dependent on the 
degree of formality 
(register) expected by the 
listener or reader.
Classifying the above items 
according to the degree or 
formality expected; 
rewriting inappropriately 
written items. 
(Process writing 
encourages writers to 
generate and arrange 
ideas, to seek feedback and 
to draft and redraft, before 
final proofreading).
Identifying inappropriate 
language use in an item and 
supplying appropriate 
alternatives.
Understanding (c) – Literary Discourse
Students should be able to grasp insights from reading literature by:
1. deducing reasons 
and motives for 
particular spoken 
and written 
communications 
(other than those 
with an overt 
persuasive intent);
Distinguishing between the 
purpose of the writer, the 
speaker, and the narrator. 
The narrator’s or the 
persona’s voice is not 
necessarily the author’s; thus 
two motivations may exist in 
the same piece of writing.
Exposing students to a 
wide range of oral and 
written extracts, for 
example, biography, 
autobiography, narrator 
independent from author; 
author speaking through a 
character; poems, fables, 
satire, where characters are 
often not human. 
Imitating styles of piece 
studied.
Identifying voice; point of view 
and commenting on 
effectiveness.
2. appreciating the 
appropriateness of 
different uses of 
tone, mood, 
register, code and 
style in talks and 
speeches, and in 
literary forms 
(prose, verse and 
drama), in relation 
to the author’s 
intention;
Tone: attitude expressed by 
the speaker or “voice”, mood 
or atmosphere: emotion 
conveyed in a work; register: 
selection of language in 
indicating level of formality; 
code: language peculiar to a 
specific group; style: manner 
of statement, including form,
structure, language.
Reading and listening to a 
range of literary and non￾literary material, including 
poems, short stories, 
novels, plays, movies and 
TV items, newspaper, 
magazines, manuals. 
Identifying elements and 
evaluating their 
appropriateness. (This is 
an ongoing process, not 
restricted to English 
classes).
Reading and dramatising 
pieces; Writing evaluative 
comments.
Comparing and contrasting 
selections on the same issue, for 
example, literary and non-literary 
prose extracts; poems and drama 
extracts; poems and prose extracts.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 12
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
Interpretative dramatisation 
of selections (all genres). This 
is not limited to the original 
piece but must be allowed to 
include the students’ 
interpretations that may 
produce new versions. View 
DVDs with alternative 
conclusions and discuss 
changes in meaning effected.
3. detecting 
connotations in the 
use of words and in 
the presentation of 
ideas and 
distinguishing 
between 
connotative and 
denotative 
meaning; 
Connotative: emotional, 
cultural, social associations 
given to words; 
Denotative: standard 
meaning necessary for 
precise understanding of 
meaning. (See also 
Understanding (b) 8 overleaf). 
 
Learning effective use of 
dictionary; exploring 
meanings of words in 
current use; slang, jargon; 
studying effect of word 
choice and shades of 
meaning on slant and bias 
in speech or writing (for 
example, about gender, 
race, politics, religion, 
culture). 
Regular practice in 
identifying and assessing 
the effects of an increasing 
range of devices; students 
creating effects by using 
their own devices in 
descriptive writing. 
Small group activities: 
reading circles and book 
clubs; Book reviews.
Ranking words according to 
their negative and positive 
connotations;
Identifying bias in given 
examples;
Identifying reasons for effect 
produced in examples of biased 
writing or speech. 
4. detecting and 
assessing the apt use 
of devices such as 
pun, innuendo, 
exaggeration, irony 
and symbolism;
Importance of 
understanding why a 
particular device is used and 
its effect on meaning.
Reading specifically to detect 
hidden meanings. Listening 
to song lyrics (for example: 
calypso, dub) to understand 
meanings.
Identifying and explaining the 
effect of devices in given 
written passages, oral extracts.
5. recognising and 
responding to the 
appropriateness or 
otherwise of the 
medium, including 
form and structure, 
used by a speaker, 
director or author 
to achieve the 
intended effect of a 
talk or speech, 
letter, article or 
Identification and use of 
verse, stanza, dialogue, 
reported speech, 
punctuation, formal and 
informal writing, first and 
third person narratives, 
flashbacks, acts, stage 
directions.
Exposure to a variety of 
material to show the range 
of forms and structure 
found in written and 
spoken statement.
Study of folk expressions – 
West Indian and others (all 
contributors to Caribbean 
culture). 
Identifying and describing 
form and structure found in 
given examples; Imitating 
models of form and structure 
with new content.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 13
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
essay, poem, novel, 
story or play; 
6. visualising the 
situation, attitudes, 
mood and setting of 
a play and 
appreciating how 
they influence the 
actions and 
interaction of actors 
in the performance 
of that play;
Recognition of the 
importance of the director 
and actors to the 
interpretation of a script; the 
need for the reader of a play 
to visualise it in 
performance.
Seeing a play or film 
(especially one that has 
been read) performed on 
stage or screen; Acting 
parts of a play in class; 
practice in reading parts; 
investigating aspects of 
putting on plays: casting, 
set design, costumes, 
props, advertising.
Internet research to locate 
and study pictures of 
unfamiliar places; 
Visits to galleries/study of 
print/photo collections.
Identifying and explaining 
differences between a text and 
movie of the text;
Explaining links between 
setting, action, motives, 
character;
Directing a scene with fellow 
students.
7. recognising implicit 
themes;
Theme: a dominant view, or 
one of the recurring ideas, 
stated or implied in a work, 
for example, love, jealousy, 
heroism, freedom.
Identifying and defining 
underlying ideas in a text 
in small groups or 
individually. 
Identifying and tracing themes; 
Assessing a theme’s importance 
to the plot, with supporting 
evidence.
8. responding to good 
literature (West 
Indian and other 
literature in 
English): novels 
short stories, poems 
and plays; making 
critical appraisal of 
values and 
concepts
expressed in 
literature, and 
relating these to
everyday living.
Literature – a reflection of 
life-experience as well as a 
vicarious extension and 
enrichment of it; a means of 
evaluating personal values 
and those expressed in 
literature, and sometimes 
forming new values.
Identifying (in group 
discussion and individual 
writing) values 
encountered in texts; 
evaluate them on (a) 
personal, (b) social, and (c) 
ethical levels.
Identifying values expressed in 
texts; Assessing these with 
reasons and supporting 
opinions; 
Assessing identity of a 
character and explaining 
motivation.
Expression (c) – Literary Discourse
Students should derive aesthetic satisfaction from creative writing by:
1. organising and 
sequencing ideas to 
Exploring various forms of 
self-statement, spoken and 
Writing and reading 
stories, verse, dramatic Submitting outline, drafts and 
fair copy of imaginative piece, 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 14
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
communicate 
emotions and 
imaginative 
interpretations of 
experience;
written, give opportunities 
for development and 
discovery; this applies 
particularly when efforts are 
shared, and benefit from 
audience feedback, and 
revision.
scenes, possibly after 
discussion of personal 
experience, a topical event, 
or some other stimulus.
for assessment of both final 
product and process of writing; 
Practising independent 
revision of imaginative writing 
done under test conditions.
2. recognise the 
various literary 
devices and their 
contribution to 
meaning and 
demonstrate an 
ability to interpret, 
at various levels 
different creative 
works.
Metaphors, simile, proverbs 
and other idiomatic 
expressions across genres.
Discussion of meaning in 
works which use the 
devices well; 
Assessment of such devices 
and their contribution to 
meaning.
(See Understanding c Item 4). 
Identify the devices as used in 
various works; 
Creating short stories/poems 
which use and respond to such 
devices. 
Reading aloud to demonstrate 
understanding of the work 
which use the devices. 
3. using language 
(tone, mood, 
register, code and 
style) appropriate to 
particular situations 
and contexts.
Effective speech and writing 
both depend on the 
suitability of word choice 
and style to the subject, to 
the situation, and to the 
people being addressed.
See tone, mood, register, 
code and style in 
Understanding 2 overleaf.
Evaluating different 
imaginative and real 
situations to determine 
what use of language is 
appropriate for narrator, 
character.
Writing relevant statements in 
language suited to different 
speakers, situations.
Understanding (d) Persuasive Discourse
Students should be able to recognise and evaluate opinion(s) expressed in various forms. This involves the ability to: 
 
 
1. distinguish factual 
statements from 
opinion expressed 
in various forms;
If assertions are capable of 
being verified (factual, even 
if shown to be false), the 
appeal is to reason and the 
audience can use its 
judgment; if opinions are 
given without grounds which 
can be verified then they are 
unreliable.
Identifying and analyzing 
statements of different 
kinds of prepared passages, 
and in advertisements, 
letters to the editor, 
reviews, sports reports; 
removing all but logical 
arguments from prepared 
persuasive passage, 
listening to and viewing 
tapes of speeches.
Reading court reports and 
reports on trials.
Studying short proposals, 
paying attention to structure 
and reasoning.
Identifying verifiable and 
unverifiable statements in a 
passage. Judging the 
soundness of selected verifiable 
assertions. Identifying the 
more reasonable (logically 
presented) of two persuasive 
passages.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 15
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
2. detect connotations 
in the use of words 
and in the 
presentation of 
ideas;
Bias and slant may be 
detected in the choice of 
words, especially those 
carrying relevant 
connotations.
Discussion of the effect of 
loaded expressions in 
advertisements and other 
persuasive material.
Comparing two accounts 
of the same event and 
descriptions of the same 
scene from different points of 
view.
Identifying and evaluating the 
persuasive effect of given 
devices.
3. evaluate the 
effectiveness of 
language devices 
used to persuade;
Rhetorical questions, 
repetitions, hyperbole, 
litotes, irony, sarcasm, 
paradox, oxymoron, pathetic 
fallacy, rhyme and other 
devices of sound, and 
figurative language.
Identifying each device in 
persuasive material 
provided, discussing 
persuasive effects in 
context.
Identifying and evaluating the 
persuasive effect of given 
devices.
4. recognise the range 
of techniques of 
persuasion 
employed in social 
intercourse and by 
the mass media and 
assess the persuasive 
effects.
Appeals to authority, desires, 
fears and other emotions; 
use of statistics; association 
of ideas; contrast, ridicule; 
rhetorical questions and 
other language devices; 
visual and auditory effects.
Discuss likely reasons for 
the use of particular 
techniques in 
advertisements and 
campaigns; identify 
various techniques in 
persuasive material 
recalled or shown in class.
Study proposals and reports to 
see how tables, charts are 
used.
Using the Internet, study 
video clips to note how visuals 
are used to persuade.
Identifying examples of 
techniques in given persuasive 
items; explaining the purpose 
of the technique used in a 
given example; analysing and 
assessing the effectiveness of a 
piece of persuasive language.
 
Expression (d) – Persuasive Discourse
Students should be able to communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or dissuades 
effectively, namely:
1. present reasoned 
evaluative 
comments on 
Reasoned opinions draw 
their conclusions logically on 
the basis of facts. Giving 
Supporting opinions with 
reasons; providing sound 
reasons for agreeing or 
Stating a position for example 
on new transport and traffic 
proposals, community projects 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 16
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
proposals and 
situations of various 
kinds, in language 
that is clear and 
appropriate to the 
occasion;
opinions, which others may 
not agree with, requires fact.
disagreeing with 
suggestions; practising 
inoffensive ways of 
complaining, disagreeing.
Preparing persuasive 
arguments for specific contexts
(home/school). 
Constructing and supporting 
proposals. 
Role play (impromptu) 
arguments for and against.
and institutions) orally (in a 
meeting) or in a letter to the 
newspaper Editor.
2. demonstrate the 
ability to employ, 
wherever necessary, 
a range of 
persuasive 
techniques for 
emotional impact;
Psychological persuasion is 
used, not only to manipulate 
people into buying goods or 
supporting beliefs, but to 
warn those in danger and to 
strengthen those in distress.
Advertising a product (a) 
deceptively and (b) 
responsibly, identifying 
situations where 
persuasion targeting 
emotions may be justified; 
practising such persuasion 
in speech and writing.
Writing advertising copy to 
dissuade children from using 
illegal drugs; writing to a 
disillusioned teenaged relative 
to persuade him or her not to 
give up hope.
3. present a logical 
argument using 
justifiable 
techniques related 
to sound or a hand 
written debate.
Serious argumentative essays 
and speeches emphasise 
reason over emotion, though 
they may be made more 
attractive by the occasional 
use of emotive appeals. Both 
sides of an issue are 
recognised, and the writer 
makes his or her stance clear.
Practice in generalising 
from appropriate evidence, 
and deducing logically 
from facts, debating issues, 
and writing items to 
persuade with a minimum 
of emotional appeal, and 
with opposing views noted 
and answered.
Writing argumentative essay, 
letters, and media articles and 
commentaries.
Discussing the effectiveness of 
chosen advertisements.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 17
♦ OTHER ENGLISH A EXAMINATION
Candidates taking this subject will not be required to submit an SBA. They will be assessed by external 
examination only. Mastery of knowledge and skills embodied in the subject content will be assessed under 
two profile dimensions. 
1. Profile Dimension 1: Understanding
The skills to be examined under this profile dimension are the ability to:
(a) understand meaning conveyed in reading, through word choice, grammar, punctuation 
and paragraphing, and to obtain information accurately;
(b) grasp insights from reading literature;
(c) evaluate opinions expressed in various forms.
2. Profile Dimension 2: Expression
The skills to be examined under this profile dimension are the ability to:
(a) communicate factual information clearly, concisely, and adequately in giving written
instructions, reports, summaries, and expositions in appropriate language;
(b) give aesthetic satisfaction to others in personal, creative and imaginative language;
(c) communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or 
dissuades effectively.
As the syllabus implies, all students have the same basic language needs and will be called on in social 
intercourse to utilise the same range of language skills.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 18
OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH A
Paper 01 (1 hour 30 minutes - 24% of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper 
This paper consists of 60 compulsory multiple-choice items arranged in two sections. Section One
consists of 20 discrete items and Section Two consists of 40 reading comprehension items based on 
five stimuli as follows:
one poem; one narrative extract; one expository extract; one persuasive extract (for example, an advertisement or a 
speech or a letter to the editor); one visual extract (for example, tables, diagrams, maps, conventional sign and 
symbols, cartoons, advertisement).
 
2. Mark Allocation
(a) One mark will be assigned for each question.
(b) The total number of marks available for this paper is 60.
(c) This paper contributes 24% towards the final assessment.
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 1 as follows: 
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to understand meaning conveyed through
word choice, grammar, syntax, sentence structure, punctuation and paragraphing.
In Section Two, marks will be awarded for the ability to (i) obtain information accurately, (ii) grasp 
insights from reading literature and (iii) recognise and evaluate opinions expressed in various 
forms.
Paper 02 (2 hours and 30 minutes – 76% of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper
This paper is divided into the following four sections:
Section One consists of one compulsory question.
Section Two consists of two compulsory short-answer reading comprehension questions.
Section Three consists of three questions. Two questions require candidates to produce short 
stories and one requires a descriptive essay. Candidates must do only one of the three questions.
Section Four consists of two argumentative essay questions. Candidates must attempt one 
question.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 19
2. Mark Allocation
(a) Section One is worth 30 marks.
(b) Each reading comprehension test in Section Two is worth 15 marks (total 30 marks).
(c) Section Three is worth 35 marks.
(d) Section Four is worth 35 marks. 
(e) This paper is worth 130 marks, and contributes 76% towards the final assessment. 
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 1, as follows:
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to:
(a) use appropriate grammatical forms, and suitable punctuation and paragraphing to convey 
meaning clearly and with facility;
(b) communicate factual information clearly, concisely, and adequately in written instructions, 
reports and summaries in appropriate language.
In Section Two, marks will be awarded for the candidate’s ability to: 
(c) understand meaning conveyed in reading, through word choice, grammar, punctuation 
and paragraphing; 
(d) obtain information accurately;
(e) grasp insights from reading literature; and 
(f) recognise and evaluate opinions expressed in various forms.
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 2, as follows:
 
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to (i) use appropriate grammatical forms, and 
suitable punctuation and paragraphing to convey meaning clearly and with facility and (ii) use 
appropriate language and communicate factual information clearly, concisely and adequately in writing 
reports and summaries. 
 
In Section Three, marks will be awarded for the ability to give aesthetic satisfaction to others in 
personal, creative and imaginative language.
In Section Four, marks will be awarded for the ability to communicate personal opinion clearly 
and cogently in language which effectively persuades or dissuades.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 20
Tables 1 and 2 present a summary of the assessment scheme for the English A Syllabus. 
Assessment Grids for English A Examinations
Table 1 - Marks Allocated to Examination Components
Paper Component 
(Questions)
Profile 1 
Understanding 
Profile 2 
Expression
EXAMINATION
01 1-60 60 (24%) - 60 (24%)
02 
Section I (Qu. 1) 10 (4%) 20 (13.33%) 30 (17.33%)
Section II (Qu. 2, 3) 30 (12%) - 30 (12%)
Section III (Qu. 4,5,6) - 35 (23.33%) 35 (23.33%)
Section IV (Qu. 7,8) - 35 (23.33%) 35 (23.33%)
EXAMINATION - 100 (40%) 90 (60%) 190 (100%)
Marks in Table 1 above are weighted so that they contribute to the overall examinations the proportions 
shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2 - Weighting of Examination Components - English A
Profile 1
Understanding
Profile 2
Expression
Composite
Paper 01
(1 hour 30 minutes) 24% - 24%
Paper 02 
(2 hours 30 minutes) 16% 60% 76%
Examination 
(4 hours) 40% 60% 100%
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 21
♦ THE ENGLISH B EXAMINATION
INTRODUCTION 
In English B, teachers guide students to explore how writers, poets and dramatists craft their work to influence our 
feelings and thoughts about life. Literature is a storehouse of humankind’s collective imagination and ideas. As 
teachers guide students to explore the rich world of literature they are confronted with many facets of the human 
experience as presented by literary artists. Historical, current or future events may stimulate them to peer into the 
mirror of shared psychological and social realities. This exposure supports students forging national and personal 
identities and creates a heightened sense of appreciation for the commonalities and differences in our human experience.
 
The exploration of literature is intended to foster students’ awareness on how writers create their literary worlds; to 
encourage students to make critical evaluations of those attitudes, values and beliefs that are portrayed and to develop 
in students a sense of empathy as they see their own humanity reflected in literary characters and situations.
EXAMINATION
The English B examination is intended to provide a test of the skills outlined below and those general skills 
listed on page 3 of the syllabus under Understanding (c). Together with the English A examinations, this will 
provide a complete test of the full range of skills which the integrated syllabus is designed to develop.
It is designed to be a test of candidates’ acquisition of those skills that would enable them to understand how 
literature functions and to pursue the study of literature at an advanced level.
The examination is designed to test a range of skills which include:
1. the ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgements, states of consciousness and 
other concepts explored in literature, and to relate these to everyday living;
2. description (the outlining of relevant content), analysis (the ability to break down, select and comment on 
the significance of relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to bring together and condense in a new 
form information drawn from various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular 
question);
3. the ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses 
in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism;
4. the ability to produce balanced critical analyses;
5. the ability to recognise the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour); 
6. the ability to recognise and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text;
7. the ability to grasp concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 22
OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH B
English B is assessed under three profile dimensions: Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction.
1. Profile Dimension 1 – Drama
This profile dimension will emphasise the study, teaching, and understanding of drama as a 
discrete literary genre. Although, it shares literary elements with the other literary genres, it possesses 
elements that are unique to drama, for example:
(a) performance as its main vehicle;
(b) stage directions;
(c) character; 
(d) spectacle;
(e) the development of character, theme, and atmosphere through elements such as lighting 
costuming, stage prop. 
Such dramatic elements ought to be the primary focus of teaching and study.
2. Profile Dimension 2 – Poetry
This profile dimension will emphasise the study, teaching, and understanding of poetry as a 
discrete literary genre. Although, it shares literary elements with the two other literary genres, there 
are elements specific to poetry, such as:
(a) fixed forms, metre, rhythm and rhyme;
(b) the economy of language;
(c) the organic relationship between sound and sense;
(d) the figurative language employed to give the poem levels of meaning. 
Such elements ought to be the primary focus of the teaching and study of poetry.
3. Profile Dimension 3 – Prose Fiction
Prose Fiction is more often than not the most expansive and experimental of the literary genres and 
it is for many the most accessible. Following are some of the elements of prose fiction that must be 
studied, taught, and understood: 
(a) narrative technique and the use of first-person and third-person narrators;
(b) structure, that is, the way in which a work of prose fiction is put together, for example, 
whether it is an unbroken narrative, or a narrative divided into chapters, or into larger 
sections or more than one narrative put together to form a longer narrative; 
(c) the difference between narration and description;
(d) the presentation of humankind in a social setting;
(e) characterisation; 
(f) themes. 
Such elements ought to be the primary focus of the teaching and study of the novel and the short 
story.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 23
In each of the three literary genres the following skills will be tested:
1. Understanding
Knowledge of Text and Insight
 
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of examples 
2. Expression
(a) Organisation of Response
(i) Structure and development of responses
(ii) Clear and logical argument
(b) Quality of Language
(i) Clarity and appropriateness of expression used
(ii) Mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling)
ASSESSMENT DETAILS 
Paper 01 (1 hour 30 minutes - 36 % of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper 
 All questions are compulsory. This paper will consist of three questions, one question from each 
genre – drama, poetry and prose fiction. In each question candidates will be required to give 
approximately 5 - 7 short answers. 
 
2. Mark Allocation
(a) Twenty marks will be allocated for each question in this paper.
(b) The total number of marks available for this paper is 60. 
(c) This paper contributes 36% to the whole examination.
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded in each profile dimension for relevance and accuracy of content, relevance 
and accuracy of illustration, and quality and clarity of argument.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 24
Paper 02 (2 hours – 64% of Total Assessment) – (reading time – 10 minutes) 
1. Composition of Paper 
This paper is divided into the three sections:
(a) Section ONE – Drama (Shakespeare and Modern Drama). This section consists of four 
Type A questions, two from each text. Thirty-five marks are allocated for each question. 
Candidates must answer one question from this section.
(b) Section TWO – Poetry (a selection of poems – two questions). This section consists of two 
Type B questions, one generic question allowing candidates to use two appropriate choices from the 
prescribed poems and one question based on two named poems from the prescribed list. Thirty-five
marks are allocated for each question. Candidates must answer one question from this 
section.
(c) Section THREE – Prose Fiction (EITHER West Indian novel OR other novels in English 
OR West Indian short story and other short stories in English). This section consists of six 
questions: four Type A questions, two on each prescribed novel and two Type B questions, one 
generic question allowing candidates to use two appropriate choices from the prescribed short stories 
and one question based on two named short stories from the prescribed list. Thirty-five marks are 
allocated for each question. Candidates must answer one question from this section.
2. Number of Questions
This paper consists of 12 optional extended-essay questions arranged under the three sections 
outlined above. There are two types of questions in this paper:
Type A - Questions that require knowledge and study of one text;
Type B – Questions of comparison that require knowledge and study of two poems or short stories.
Candidates will be required to answer a total of THREE questions, one from EACH section. 
3. Mark Allocation
Each question will be worth 35 marks. This paper is worth 105 marks. 
4. Award of Marks
Candidates are expected to show knowledge, insight, quality of argument, and organisation of 
response. 
Marks will be awarded for relevance and accuracy of content, relevance and accuracy of illustration 
and quality and clarity of argument. Marks will also be awarded for the structure and development 
of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs, and for competence in the mechanics of 
writing.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 25
Organisation of Paper 02 
Drama [Section One]
Question 1 Type A question [35 marks] 
Question 2 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 3 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 4 Type A question [35 marks]
Poetry [Section Two]
Question 1 Type B question [35 marks]
Question 2 Type B question [35 marks]
Prose Fiction [Section Three] Novel
Question 1 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 2 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 3 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 4 Type A question [35 marks]
Short Stories
Question 5 Type B question [35 marks]
Question 6 Type B question [35 marks]
The outline of the assessment scheme above and Table 1 overleaf are presented to describe and summarise 
the assessment design for English B.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 26
Relevant to 2012 – 2017 Assessment Grids for English B Examination Table 1: Marks Allocated to Examination Components Proficiency Profile Paper 01 Paper 02 Composite General
Drama 20 
(12.12%)
35 
(21.21%)
55 
(33.33%)
Poetry 20 
(12.12%)
35 
(21.21%)
55 
(33.33%)
Prose Fiction 20 
(12.12%
35 
(21.21%)
 55 
 (33.33%)
Total 60 
(36%)
105 
(64%)
165 
(100%)
Time 1 hour 30 minutes 2 hours 10 minutes 3 hours 40 minutes
Table 2: Weighting of Examination Components – English B
 Drama Poetry Prose Fiction Components
Paper 01 1 hour 30 minutes 12.12% 12.12% 12.12% 36% 
Paper 02 2 hours 10 minutes 21.21% 21.21% 21.21% 64% 
Examination 3 hours 40 minutes 33.33% 33.33% 33.33% 100%
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 27
♦ PRESCRIBED TEXTS FOR ENGLISH B
TEXTS PRESCIBED FOR THE 2012 - 2014 EXAMINATIONS ARE AS FOLLOWS
TEXT AUTHOR OR EDITOR DRAMA Four Questions will be set
A Midsummer Night’s Dream William Shakespeare
Old Story Time Trevor Rhone
POETRY 
Two Questions will be set
Selections from A World of Poetry for CXC Hazel Simmons-McDonald and
(New Edition) Mark McWatt
Poems Prescribed for the 2012 – 2014 Examinations are as Follows Two type B Questions will be set TEXT AUTHOR
A Contemplation Upon Flowers Henry King
Once Upon a Time Gabriel Okara
Forgive My Guilt Robert P. Tristram Coffin
West Indies, U.S.A. Stewart Brown
Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge William Wordsworth
Orchids Hazel Simmons-McDonald
The Woman Speaks to the Man who has Lorna Goodison
 Employed Her Son 
It is the Constant Image of your Face Dennis Brutus
God’s Grandeur Gerard Manley Hopkins
A Stone’s Throw Elma Mitchell
Test Match Sabina Park Stewart Brown
Theme for English B Langston Hughes
Dreaming Black Boy James Berry
Epitaph Dennis Scott
Dulce et Decorum Est Wilfred Owen
This is the Dark Time, My Love Martin Carter
Ol’Higue Mark McWatt
‘Le Loupgarou’ Derek Walcott
South Kamau Brathwaite
To an Athlete Dying Young A.E. Housman
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 28
PROSE FICTION 
Novel – Four Type A questions will be set. West Indian
Songs of Silence Curdella Forbes
The Wine of Astonishment Earl Lovelace
Short Story - Two Type B Questions will be set from the ten named short stories 
Selections from A World of Prose for CXC David Williams and
(New Edition) Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Short Stories Prescribed for the 2012 – 2014 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
Blackout Roger Mais
Shabine Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Emma Carolyn Cole
The Man of the House Frank O’Connor
Septimus John Wickham
The Day the World Almost Came to an End Pearl Crayton
The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream Olive Senior
Berry Langston Hughes
Mom Luby and the Social Worker Kristin Hunter
To Da-duh, in Memoriam Paule Marshall
 
TEXTS PRESCRIBED FOR THE 2015 – 2017 EXAMINATIONS ARE AS 
FOLLOWS
TEXT AUTHOR DRAMA 
Four Type A Questions will be set
Julius Caesar William Shakespeare
The Lion and the Jewel Wole Soyinka
POETRY Two Type B Questions will be set
Selections from A World of Poetry Hazel Simmons-McDonald and 
(New Edition) Mark McWatt
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 29
Poems Prescribed for the 2015 – 2017 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
A Contemplation Upon Flowers Henry King
Once Upon a Time Gabriel Okara
Forgive My Guilt Robert P. Tristram Coffin
West Indies, U.S.A. Stewart Brown
Sonnet Composed Upon Westminister Bridge William Wordsworth
Orchids Hazel Simmons-McDonald
The Woman Speaks to the Man who has Lorna Goodison 
 Employed Her Son 
It is the Constant Image of your Face Dennis Brutus
A Lesson for this Sunday Derek Walcott
A Stone’s Throw Elma Mitchell
Test Match Sabina Park Stewart Brown
Theme for English B Langston Hughes
Dreaming Black Boy James Berry
Death Came to see me in Hot Pink Pants Heather Royes
Dulce et Decorum Est Wilfred Owen
This is the dark time, my love Martin Carter
Ol’Higue Mark McWatt
‘Le Loupgarou’ Derek Walcott
South Kamau Brathwaite
Because I could not stop for Death Emily Dickinson
PROSE FICTION Novel – Four Type A questions will be set.
Frangipani House Beryl Gilroy
Things Fall Apart Chinua Achebe
Short Story - Two Type B questions will be set from the ten named short stories.
Selections from A World of Prose for CXC David Williams and
(New Edition) Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Short Stories Prescribed for the 2015 – 2017 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
Raymond’s Run Tony Cade Bambara
Shabine Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Emma Carolyn Cole
The Man of the House Frank O’Connor
Georgia and Them There United States Velma Pollard
The Day the World Almost Came to an End Pearl Crayton
The Two Grandmothers Olive Senior
Berry Langston Hughes
Mom Luby and the Social Worker Kristin Hunter
To Da-duh, in Memoriam Paule Marshall 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 30
♦ SUGGESTED READING LIST 
(For selecting literature for class study and library reading)
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
NOVELS
Achebe, Chinua Arrow of God Heinemann 5 
Adams, Douglas The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the 
Galaxy
Ballantine Books of 
Canada
3 and 4 
Adams, Richard Watership Down Penguin 3, 4 and 5
Adler, Elizabeth The King's Shadow Tandem Library 4 and 5
Aidoo, Ama The Dilemma of a 
Ghost/Anowa
Longman 4 and 5
Aiken, Joan Night Fall Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston
4
Akpabot, Anne Aduke Makes Her Choice Nelson 4 and 5
Alcott, Louisa May Eight Cousins 1st World Library Literary 
Society
1 and 2
Allen, Eric The Latchkey Children Heinemann Educational 1 
Allende, Isabel City of the Beasts Harper Collins 3, 4 and 5 
Altmann, Martina Jeremiah, Devil of the Woods Pan Macmillan 1 and 2
Amadi, Elechi The Concubine Heinemann 4 and 5 
Amis, Kingsley Lucky Jim Victor Gollancz 4 and 5
Anaya, Rudolfo Bless Me, Ultima Grand Central Publishing 4 and 5
Angelou, Maya I Know Why the Caged Bird 
Sings
Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Anne, Frank Centre Anne Frank: Beyond the 
Diary
Puffin 4 and 5
Anthony, Michael Green Days by the River Heinemann 4 and 5
Apple, Arnold Son of Guyana Oxford University Press 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 31
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Armstrong, William H. Sounder HarperCollins 1 and 2
Austen, Jane Emma Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Ba, Marianna So Long a Letter Heinemann 5 
Bagnold, Enid National Velvet Morrow 1 
Baldwin, James Go Tell It on the Mountain Delta Trade Paperbacks 
 
5 
Ballard, J. Empire of the Sun Heinemann 3
Banks, Lynne Reid One More River Valentine, Mitchell 3
Blume, Judy Are You There God? It's Me, 
Margaret
Simon & Schuster 
Children’s Publishing
1 and 2
Bosse, Malcolm J. Ganesh Crowell 3
Braithwaite, E.R. To Sir With Love Signet Book 3 and 4
Brickhill, Paul The Dam Busters W. W. Norton 4 and 5 
Brontë, Charlotte Jane Eyre Penguin 4 and 5
Brontë, Emily Wuthering Heights Signet Classic 4 and 5 
Burnett, F. Hodgson The Secret Garden Signet Classic 1 
Butler, Octavia Kindred Beacon Press 4 and 5 
Byars, Betsy Cracker Jackson Puffin 1, 2, and 3 
Byrne, Donn Gandhi Longman 4 and 5 
Carpenter, Richard Catweazle Penguin 1 and 2
Carroll, Lewis Alice in Wonderland Digital Scanning Inc. 1
Chambers, Aidan The Present Takers Harper & Row 3, 4 and 5
Chesterton, G. K. The Man Who was Thursday Penguin 3 and 4
Chinodya, Shimmer Harvest of Thorns Heinemann 4 and 5
Christopher, John The Guardians Hamish Hamilton 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 32
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Cisneros, Sandra The House on Mango Street Vintage Books 2 and 3
Clarke, Arthur Dolphin Island Gollancz 1 and 2 
Cleary, Beverly Fifteen HarperCollins 2 
Cliff, Michelle Abeng Plume 4 and 5 
Collins, Merle Angel Seal Press 4 and 5 
Conly, Jane Lesley Rasco and Rats of Nimh Heinemann New 
windmills, Puffin
1, 2 and 3
Conrad, Joseph Lord Jim Courier Dover 
Publications
5
Cooper, J. California Family Anchor Books 4 and 5
Cooper, Susan Over Sea. Under Stone Puffin 1 and 2
Coppard, Yvonne Not Dressed Like that You 
Don’t
Piccadilly Press Ltd. 3
Cormier, Robert I am the Cheese Alfred Aknopf 5
Crane, Stephen The Red Badge of Courage Prentice Hall 5 
Craven, Margaret I Heard the Owl Call My 
Name
Dell 4 and 5 
D’Costa, Jean Escape to Last Man Peak Longman 1 
Dahl, Roald Matilda Penguin 1 
Darke, Marjorie The First of Midnight
A Long Way to Go
Seabury Press
Kestrel Books
3
3 
De Jong, Mendert The House of Sixty Fathers
The Wheel on the School
Harper & Row
Harper & Row
1 and 2
De Lisser, Herbert Jane's Career Heinemann 4 and 5
Defoe, Daniel Robinson Crusoe (Abridged) Penguin 2, 3 and 4
Desai, Anita The Village by the Sea Chivers 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 33
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Dickens, Charles A Christmas Carol
David Copperfield
(Abridged)*
Great Expectations
Oliver Twist (Abridged)
Macmillan
Gerald Duckworth & Co.
Pearson Education
Barnes & Noble
2 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
*Contained in the classics published by Longmans.
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan The Hound of the Baskervilles
The Return of Sherlock 
Holmes
Penguin
1st World Publishing
3
3 
Drayton, Godfrey Christopher Heinemann 1,2 and 3
Duder, Tessa Alex Oxford University Press 3
Dumas, Alexandre The Three Musketeers Wildside 2
Durrel, Gerald Three Singles to Adventure F.A. Thorpe 2
Edgell, Zee Beka Lamb
The Festival of San Joaquin
Heinemann
Heinemann
3, 4 and 5 
4 and 5
Ellison, Ralph The Invisible Man Sparknotes 5 
Ekwensi, Cyprian Burning Grass Heinemann 3 and 4 
Eliot, George Silas Marner: The Weaver of 
Raveloe
Kessinger 5 
Emecheta, Buchi The Joys of Motherhood Heinemann 4 and 5 
Fairclough, Peter Three Gothic Novels Penguin 4 and 5 
Faulkner, William Sanctuary Vintage International 4 and 5
Fisk, Nicholas Trillions Nelson 2
Fitzgerald, F. Scott The Great Gatsby Demco Media 5
Fitzhugh, Louise Harriet the Spy Random House Children 
Books
1
Forbes, Curdella Songs of Silence Heinemann 4 and 5
Foster, E. M. A Passage to India Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich
5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 34
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Francis, Dick Odds Against Berkley 4 and 5 
Gallico, Paul Jennie
The Small Miracle
The Snow Goose
Penguin
Doubleday
Knopf
1 
1 
1 
Garnett, Eve The Family from One-End 
Street
Further Adventures of the 
Family from One End Street
F. Muller
Penguin
1 
1 
George, Jean My Side of the Mountain Thorndike 1
Gilmore, Kate Of Griffins and Graffiti Penguin 3
Gilroy, Beryl Frangipani House
Boy Sandwich
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Godden, Rumer Listen to the Nightingale
Thursday’s Children
Penguin
Viking
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Goldsmith, Oliver The Vicar of Wakefield Wordsworth 4 and 5 
Gordimer, Nadine July’s Children Longman 4 and 5 
Grahame, Kenneth The Wind in the Willows Heinemann New 
Windmills, Methuen, 
Puffin, Wordsworth 
Publishers
1 and 2 
Green, Roger Lancelyn The Adventures of Robin 
Hood
King Arthur and His Knights 
of the Round Table
Myths of the Norsemen
Tales of Ancient Egypt
Tales of the Greek Heroes
The Luck of Troy
The Tale of Troy
Puffin
Penguin
Penguin
Sagebrush
Penguin
Penguin
Penguin
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Greene, Graham The Fallen Idol/The Third 
Man 
The Heart of the Master
Penguin
Heinmann, Mandarin, 
Penguin
4 and 5
5 
Guy, Rosa And I Heard A Bird Sing
Paris, Peewee and Big Dog
Delacorte
Orion 
3, 4 and 5
1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 35
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
The Disappearance Tandem 5
Haddon, Mark The Curious Incident of the Dog 
in the Night-time
Alexandria 4 and 5
Haggard, H. Rider King Solomon's Mines Wildside 3 
Hardy, Thomas Far from the Madding Crowd
The Mayor of Casterbridge
Tess of the D’Urbervilles
Plain Label 
Norton 
Reprint Services 
Corporation
4 and 5 
5 
5 
Harold, Gwyneth Bad Girls in School Heinemann 4 and 5
Hart, James V. The Novelisation Penguin 4 and 5
Hartley, L. P. The Go-Between Heinemann 4 and 5
Hautzig, Esther The Endless Steppe Penguin 3
Hawthorne, Nathaniel The Scarlet Letter Houghton Miffin 5
Head, Bessie Mary Heinemann 4 and 5
Hearne, John Voices Under the Window Pepal Tree 4 and 5 
Hemmingway, Ernest A Farewell to Arms
For whom the Bell Tolls
The Old Man and the Sea 
Charles Scribner’s Sons
Simon & Schuster 
Klett Ernst
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Hentoff, Nat The Day They Came to Arrest 
the Book
Dell 3 
Herriott, James All Creatures Great & Small
All Things Bright and 
Beautiful
All Things Wise and 
Wonderful
Every Living Thing
The Lord God Made Them All
St. Martin’s
Bantam 
St. Martin’s 
St. Martin’s 
St. Martin’s 
4 and 5
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Higgins, Jack The Eagle has Landed Penguin 4 and 5
Hines, Barry A Kestrel for a Knave Penguin 4 and 5
Hinton, S. E. The Outsiders
That Was Then, This Is Now
Lions Tracks
Turtleback
3,4 and 5 
4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 36
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Hodge, Merle Crick Crack Monkey 
For The Life of Laetitia
Heinemann
Farrar Straus and Giroux
3 
3, 4 and 5 
Holman, Felice Slake’s Limbo Aladdin Paperbacks 5 
Holme, Anne I am David Harcourt Children’s 
Books
1 
Hughes, Richard A High Wind In Jamaica Penguin 3
Huxley, Aldous Brave New World Klett Ernst 5
Imoja, Nailah Pick of the Crop Heinemann 4 and 5
James, C.L.R. Minty Alley University Press of 
Mississippi
4
James, Henry The Turn of the Screw
Portrait of a Lady
Courier Dover
Galley Press
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Jerome, J. K. Three Men in a Boat Kessinger 4 and 5
Johnson, Samuel History of Rasselas, Prince of 
Abyssinia
J. Limbird 4 and 5
Jones, Evan Skylarking Longman 1 
Jones, Toeckey Go Well, Stay Well Harper & Row 4 and 5 
Kanawa, Kiri Te and 
Foreman, Michael
Land of the Long White 
Cloud
Arcade 1 
Kastner, Erich Emil and the Detectives Overlook 1 
Kaye, M. M. The Ordinary Princess Penguin 1
Keyes, Daniel Flowers for Algemon Harcourt, Brace & World 4 and 5
Khan, Ismith The Jumbie Bird I. Obolensky 4 and 5
Kincaid, Jamaica Annie John Farrar, Straus & Giroux 2, 3 and 4
Kipling, Rudyard Jungle Book
The Second Jungle Book
1st World Publishing
Kessinger 
1
2 
L’Engle, Madeline A Wrinkle in Time Collins Educational 1 and 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 37
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Lamming, George In the Castle of My Skin University of Michigan 5 
Le Guin, Ursula A Wizard of Earth Sea
City of Illusions
Left Hand of God
Very Long Way From 
Anywhere Else
DemcoMedia 
Berkley
Longman
Harcourt
New Windmills
1, 2 and 3 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
3 
Lee, Harper To Kill a Mockingbird HarperCollins 4 and 5
Lessing, Doris The Grass is Singing Heinemann 5
Lester, Julius Basketball Game
Long Journey Home
To Be a Slave
Penguin
Dial Books
Penguin
3, 4 and 5
4 
3 and 4 
Lewis, C. Day The Otterbury Incident Putnam 2 and 3
Lewis, C. S. The Chronicles of Namia:
Book I: The Lion the 
Witch and the 
Wardrobe
Book II: Prince Caspian
Book III: The Voyage of the 
Book IV: The Silver Chair
Book V: The Horse and His
Boy
Book VI: The Magician’s 
Nephew
Book VII: The Last Battle
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Lindgren, Astrid Pippi Goes Abroad
Pippi Longstocking
Pippi in the South Seas
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
1
1 
1 
Lindsay, Joan Picnic at Hanging Rock Buccaneer 3, 4 and 5
Lingard, Joan The Guilty Party Penguin 1 and 2
Little, Jean Mama’s Going to Buy you a 
Mocking Bird
Penguin 1
Lively, Penelope A Stitch in Time Dutton 1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 38
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Lofting, Hugh
London, Jack
Doctor Doolittle
The Call of the Wild
White Fang
Tom Doherty 
Heinemann, Penguin, 
Wordsworth Publishers 
Heinemann New 
Windmills, Puffin
1 
1, 2 and 3 
2 
Lovelace, Earl The Schoolmaster
The Dragon Cant Dance
Wine of Astonishment
Heinemann
Persea 
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Lowry, Lois The Giver EMC 2 and 3
Maartens, Maretta Paper Bird Nelson 5
MacDonald, George At the Back of the North 
Wind
The Princess and the Curdie
The Princess and the Goblin
Kessinger
Kessinger
Kessinger
1
1 
1 
MacDonald, Ian The Hummingbird Tree Heinemann 4 and 5
MacKay, Claire The Minerva Programme Puffin 1
McKay, Claude Banana Bottom X Press 4
Mais, Roger Black Lightning
Brother Man
The Hills Were Joyful
Together
Heinemann
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Mankowitz, Wolf A Kid for Two Farthings ISIS 1 
Marshall, Alan I Can Jump Puddles Longman 3 
Marshall, James Vance A River Ran Out of Eden
Walkabout
Sundance
Sundance
2, 3, 4 and 5
2, 3, 4 and 5 
Marshall, Paule Reena and Other Stories
Brown Girl, Brownstones
Praise song for the Widow
Feminist
Feminist
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
4 
Matthews, P.E. State of the Heart Penguin 3
Maugham, W. S. The Razor’s Edge Vintage 4 and 5
McCormick, Patricia Sold Hyperion 3 and 4
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 39
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
McCutcheon, Elsie The Storm Bird Farrar, Straus, Giroux 4 and 5 
Meniru, Teresa Uzo Evans 3 
Milne, A. A. Winnie the Pooh Puffin 1 
Mittelholzer, Edgar Corentyne Thunder
My Bones and My Flute 
Heinemann
Longman
4 and 5 
4 
Monk Kidd, Sue The Secret Life of Bees Viking 2, 3 and 4 
Montgomery, L.M. Anne of Avonlea
Anne of Green Gables
Anne’s House of Dreams
Anne of Ingleside
Anne of the Island
Anne of Windy Willows
Courier Dover
1st World Publishing
Haynes Barton
Bantam 
Hayes Barton
Puffin
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Moore, Brian Lives of Silence Longman 4 and 5
Morrison, Toni Song of Solomon Vintage 5
Morrow, H. L. The Splendid Journey Harcourt Education 2 and 3
Munonye, John The Only Son Heinemann 3 
Naipaul, Shiva The Chip-Chip Gatherers Vintage 4 and 5 
Naipaul, V.S. A House for Mr. Biswas
Miguel Street
The Mimic Men
They Mystic Masseur 
The Suffrage of Elvira
Penguin
Heinemann
Deutsch 
Vintage 
Penguin
5 
3 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Narayan, R. K. The Guide
Man-Eater of Malgudi
Viking 
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Nash, Ogden Custard and Company Little Brown & Co. 2
Nesbit, E. The Complete Adventures of 
the Treasure Seekers
The Enchanted Castle
Five Children and It
The House of Arden
The Last of the Dragons and 
some Others
The Magic World
Puffin
Echo Library
Courier Dover
New York Review
Penguin
Penguin
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 40
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Nesbit, E. New Treasure Seekers
The Phoenix and the Carpet
The Railway Children
The Story of the Treasure
Seekers
The Wouldbegoods
Penguin
Kessinger
Courier Dover
Biblio Bazaar 
Kessinger
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Ngugi, James The River Between
Weep Not, Child
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Nicholls, Millis A Father for Christmas Nelson Caribbean 1
Norton, André Crystal Gryphon
Iron Cage
Atheneum 
Penguin 
1
1 and 2 
Norton, Mary The Borrowers
The Borrowers Afield
Borrowers Afloat
The Borrowers Avenged
Thorndike Press
Harcourt
Harcourt
Harcourt 
1
2 
2 
2 
Nwapa, Flora Efuru Heinemann 4 and 5
O’Brien, Robert Mrs Frisby and the Rats of 
Nimh
Z for Zachariah
Aladdin 
Simon Pulse 
4 and 5
4 and 5 
O’Dell, Scott Island of the Blue Dolphin
My Name is No Angelica
Streams to the River, River to 
Sea
HMco Children’s Books
HMco Children’s Books
Fawcett Juniper
3 and 4 
3 
3 
O’Hara, Mary My Friend, Flicka HarperCollins 1 
Okoro, Nathaniel The Twin Detectives Evans Bros 4 and 5 
Orwell, George Animal Farm Random House 4 and 5
Palmer, C. Everard A Cow Called Boy
Baba and Mr Big
Big Doc Bitterroot
My Father Sun Sun Johnson
The Cloud with the Silver 
Lining
The Hummingbird People
The Sun Salutes You
The Wooing of Beppo Tate
Macmillan
Collins 
Macmillan
Deutsch 
Macmillan
Deutsch 
Bobbs Merrill
Nelson Thornes
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 41
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Parris, Terry Jason Whyte Oxford University Press 1 
Paton, Alan Cry, The Beloved Country Spark 4 and 5 
Patterson, Orlando The Children of Sisyphus Bolivar 5 
Pausewang, Gudrun Fall-Out Viking 2, 3, 4 and 5 
Pearce, Phillipa A Dog So Small
Downhill All the Way
Who, Sir? Me, Sir?
Chivers North America
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
1 
2 
2 
Phillips, Marlene Nourbese Harriet's Daughter Heinemann 4 and 5
Poe, Edgar Allan Tales of Mystery and Terror Penguin 4 and 5
Pollard, Velma Homestretch Longman, Caribbean 3, 4 and 5
Ramsay, Paulette Aunt Jen Heinemann 4 and 5
Ransome, Arthur Swallows & Amazons David R. Godine 2
Redmond, Diane The Comic Strip Odyssey Penguin 1
Reid, V.S. Peter of Mount Ephraim
Sixty Five
The Leopard 
CSEC®
English
Caribbean Examinations Council
SYLLABUS 
SPECIMEN PAPER 
MARK SCHEME
SUBJECT REPORTS
EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish EnglishEnglish
Macmillan Education 
4 Crinan Street, London, N1 9XW 
A division of Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Companies and representatives throughout the world 
www.macmillan-caribbean.com 
ISBN 978-0-230-48179-4 AER
© Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC®
) 2015
www.cxc.org
www.cxc-store.com 
The author has asserted their right to be identified as the author of this work in accordance with the 
Copyright, Design and Patents Act 1988. 
First published 2014
This revised version published 2015 
Permission to copy 
The material in this book is copyright. However, the publisher grants permission for copies to be 
made without fee. Individuals may make copies for their own use or for use by classes of which they 
are in charge; institutions may make copies for use within and by the staff and students of that 
institution. For copying in any other circumstances, prior permission in writing must be obtained 
from Macmillan Publishers Limited. Under no circumstances may the material in this book be used, 
in part or in its entirety, for commercial gain. It must not be sold in any format. 
Designed by Macmillan Publishers Limited 
Cover design by Macmillan Publishers Limited and Red Giraffe 
CSEC® English A and English B Free Resources 
LIST OF CONTENTS 
CSEC® English A & B Syllabus Extract 4
CSEC® English A & B Syllabus 5
CSEC® English A Specimen Papers 
Multiple Choice 66
Paper 02 81
CSEC® English A Mark Schemes 
Multiple Choice 90
Paper 02 91
CSEC® English A Subject Reports: 
2004 Subject Report (January) 106
2004 Subject Report (June) 112
2005 Subject Report (June) 120
2006 Subject Report (June) 133
2007 Subject Report (June) 148
2008 Subject Report (June) 162
2009 Subject Report (June) 179
2010 Subject Report (January) 191
2010 Subject Report (June) 200
2011 Subject Report (January) 206
2011 Subject Report (June) 214
2012 Subject Report (January) 219
2012 Subject Report (June) 225
2013 Subject Report (January) 230
2013 Subject Report (June) 236
2013 Profile Cut-Offs 249
2013 Table of Specifications 251
2014 Subject Report (January) 253
2014 Subject Report (June) 259
2015 Subject Report (January) 267
CSEC® English B Specimen Papers: 
Paper 01 274
Paper 02 281
CSEC ® English B Mark Schemes: 
Paper 01 287
Paper 02 293
CSEC ® English B Subject Reports: 
2004 Subject Report (June) 330
2005 Subject Report (June) 339
2006 Subject Report (June) 347
2007 Subject Report (June) 355
2008 Subject Report (June) 365
2009 Subject Report (June) 375
2010 Subject Report (June) 385
2011 Subject Report (January) 394
2011 Subject Report (June) 404
2012 Subject Report (January) 414
2012 Subject Report (June) 425
2013 Subject Report (January) 437
2013 Subject Report (June) 450
2014 Subject Report (January) 462
2014 Subject Report (June) 476
2015 Subject Report (January) 488
English A & B
Students who do the English course will explore receptively and expressively three 
major literary modes – Drama, Poetry, and Prose Fiction – in order to become aware 
of the many functions and purposes of language. In doing so, they will discover that 
the four facets of language arts – namely listening, speaking, reading and writing – are 
closely linked together and are interdependent.
Syllabus objectives are organised under understanding and expression in order to guide 
curriculum development, to give meaning to a teaching programme and to define an 
assessment scheme that reinforces an English syllabus which has been conceived as 
an integrated approach to language teaching and which enables students to appreciate 
the holistic nature of language learning.
The English syllabus is organised for examination as English A and English B. The 
former emphasises the development of oral and written language skills among students 
through a variety of strategies. The latter provides opportunities for students to explore 
and respond critically to specific literary texts as they observe and appreciate the 
author’s craft.
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate
CSEC
ENGLISH
SYLLABUS
Effective for examinations from May/June 2012
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
Published by the Caribbean Examinations Council
© 2010, Caribbean Examinations Council 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form, or by any means electronic, photocopying, recording or otherwise without prior 
permission of the author or publisher.
Correspondence related to the syllabus should be addressed to:
The Pro-Registrar
Caribbean Examinations Council
Caenwood Centre
37 Arnold Road, Kingston 5, Jamaica, W.I.
Telephone: (876) 630-5200
Facsimile Number: (876) 967-4972
E-mail address: cxcwzo@cxc.org
Website: www.cxc.org
Copyright © 2009, by Caribbean Examinations Council
The Garrison, St Michael BB14038, Barbados
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
 
Content 
RATIONALE.................................................................................................................................... 1 
AIMS.................................................................................................................................................. 1 
SKILLS AND ABILITIES TO BE ASSESSED ............................................................................. 2 
RECOMMENDED TIME ALLOCATION .................................................................................. 4 
ENGLISH A AND B - NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES ......................................... 5 
THE ENGLISH A EXAMINATION.............................................................................................. 18 
- OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH A 
THE ENGLISH B EXAMINATION.............................................................................................. 22 
- OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH B
PRESCRIBED TEXTS FOR ENGLISH B..................................................................................... 29 
SUGGESTED READING LIST FOR ENGLISH ........................................................................ 32 
GLOSSARY ..................................................................................................................................... 57
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
AMENDMENTS ARE INDICATED BY ITALICS
REVISED 1997, 2003 AND 2009 
Please check the website, www.cxc.org for updates on CXC’s syllabuses
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09
English Syllabus 
♦ RATIONALE
The ability of students to understand fully what they listen to, read and view as well as to express 
themselves clearly in speech and in writing are critical factors in managing their personal and social well￾being. The study of language and literature provides opportunity for students to develop competence and 
confidence in speaking and writing for personal and public purposes in everyday activities. It also seeks to 
develop students' ability to read and enjoy literary texts, to explore social and moral issues, and to evaluate 
the way language grows, develops and is used. The study of language and literature also recognises the dynamics of 
viewing and valuing as students respond critically to the wealth of electronic media which help to shape our perceptions 
at conscious and unconscious levels. 
Students explore receptively and expressively three major literary genres, Drama, Poetry, and Prose Fiction, 
in order to become aware of the many functions and purposes of language. In doing so, they discover that 
the five facets of the language arts, namely, listening, speaking, reading, writing and viewing, are closely 
linked together and are interdependent. 
Syllabus objectives are organised under understanding and expression in order to guide curriculum 
development, to give meaning to the teaching programme and to define an assessment scheme that
reinforces an English syllabus which has been conceived as an integrated approach to language teaching. 
This enables students to appreciate the holistic nature of language learning.
The English syllabus is organised for examination as English A and English B. The former emphasises the 
development of students’ oral and written language skills among students through a variety of strategies. 
The latter provides opportunities for students to explore and respond critically to specific literary texts as 
they observe and appreciate the author’s craft.
♦ AIMS
The syllabus aims to:
1. develop the ability to use the spoken and written language, Caribbean Standard English (CSE), with precision, 
clarity and grammatical correctness;
2. develop the ability to use, understand and respond to spoken and written Caribbean Standard English; 
3. develop the ability to use language effectively for communicating in a variety of contexts: social, academic and 
professional; 
4. develop the ability to give effective articulation to experience (real or imagined);
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 1 
5. promote in students a willingness and ability to inform themselves about, and to contribute reasoned opinions on 
social issues;
6. promote a lasting appreciation of the diversity of purposes for which language varieties are used;
7. promote an understanding and appreciation of the place and value of the varieties of English and of the dialects 
and creoles of the Caribbean and other regions in different social and cultural contexts; 
8. develop a critical awareness of the language devices used to persuade;
9. develop an ability to respond to literature for pleasure, to recognise and respond to the writer’s craft, and to make 
sensitive appraisals of value judgments and other concepts expressed in literature;
10. develop knowledge of the various sources of information and a desire to use these for the student’s own 
enlightenment; while recognising the importance of acknowledging the contribution of such sources to their own 
ideas; 
11. develop the capacity to assess the reliability of sources including those available on the Internet. 
♦ SKILLS AND ABILITIES TO BE ASSESSED
The aims stated above can be attained by developing the related skills in the student. These skills are 
categorised under the two broad headings: Understanding, the decoding and interpreting of messages through 
the analysis of the language structures and devices used in any given context, and Expression, the conveying of 
meaning through the selection of language structures and devices appropriate to each specific context. 
Performance will be reported under the profile dimensions Understanding and Expression. 
1. Understanding
The ability to:
(a) understand meaning conveyed (both in listening and in reading) through word choice and 
grammar, and (in reading) through punctuation and paragraphing;
(b) obtain information accurately, as demonstrated in the ability to:
(i) recognise facts stated explicitly;
(ii) extract specific information from what is read or heard;
(iii) extract implied information;
(iv) identify stated or implied time sequence;
(v) draw valid conclusions and inferences from information presented;
(vi) recognise cause and effect relationships;
(vii) identify main and subordinate ideas and trace their development;
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 2 
(viii) recognise the difference between denotative and connotative language;
(ix) treat with passages whose main purpose is informative (expository) as opposed to 
literary or persuasive;
(x) interpret and respond to tables and pictorial communication, such as diagrams, 
conventional signs and symbols;
(c) grasp insights from reading literature and demonstrating the ability to:
(i) deduce reasons and motives for particular spoken and written communication (other 
than those with an overt persuasive intent);
(ii) appreciate the appropriateness of different uses of tone, mood, register, code and 
style in talks and speeches, in non-literary forms including scientific or technical 
writing, and in literary forms (prose, verse and drama), in relation to the author’s 
intention;
(iii) detect connotations in the use of words and in the presentation of ideas and 
distinguish between connotative and denotative meaning;
(iv) detect and assess the apt use of devices such as pun, innuendo, exaggeration, irony 
and symbolism;
(v) recognise and respond to the appropriateness of the means, including form and 
structure, used by a speaker, director or author to achieve the intended effect of a 
talk or speech, letter, article or essay, poem, novel, story or play;
(vi) visualise the situation, attitudes, mood and setting of a play and appreciate how they 
influence the actions and interaction of actors in the performance of that play;
(vii) recognise implicit themes;
(viii) respond to West Indian and other literature in English (novels, short stories, poems 
and plays): recognise elements of the writer’s craft; respond to writers’ evocation of feelings, 
moods, atmosphere; making critical appraisal of values and concepts expressed in 
literature, and relate these to everyday living;
(d) recognise and evaluate opinion expressed in various forms as demonstrated in the ability to:
(i) distinguish factual statements from unsupported opinion statements;
(ii) detect connotations in the use of words and the presentation of ideas;
(iii) evaluate the effectiveness of language devices used to persuade;
(iv) recognise the range of techniques of persuasion employed in social intercourse and 
in the mass media, and assess the persuasive effects.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 3 
2. Expression
The ability to:
(a) use appropriate diction, grammatical forms (both in speaking and in writing) and suitable 
punctuation and paragraphing to convey meaning clearly and with facility;
(b) communicate factual information clearly, concisely and adequately in giving oral and written 
instructions, reports, summaries, and expositions;
(c) give aesthetic satisfaction to others in personal, creative and imaginative language by:
(i) organising and sequencing ideas to communicate emotional and imaginative 
interpretations of experience;
(ii) using language (tone, mood, register, code and style) appropriate to particular 
situations and contexts;
(d) communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or 
dissuades effectively. This will involve the ability to: 
(i) present reasoned evaluative comments on proposals and situations of various kinds 
in language that is clear and appropriate to the occasion;
(ii) demonstrate the ability to employ, wherever necessary, a range of persuasive 
techniques for emotional impact;
(iii) present a logical argument using justifiable techniques related to sound oral and 
written debate.
♦ RECOMMENDED TIME ALLOCATION
It is recommended that in order to satisfy the requirements of the English A and English B examinations, a 
minimum of six sessions should be allocated to English A and four to English B per week. However, it is 
recognised that students and teachers operate in a wide variety of situations and under an equally wide variety 
of conditions. It is important that individual institutions develop an allocation of time taking the following 
into consideration:
(i) language competence levels of students at point of entry into the examination class;
(ii) availability of human and other resources;
(iii) learning styles of students;
(iv) school culture;
(v) normal timetable concerns; and 
(vi) balance among skills needed in English A and English B.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 4 
CONTENT
The choice of material to be used in the classroom will be guided by both the language needs of daily living 
and the need of the students to develop the skills and insights necessary if they are to derive satisfaction from 
novels, stories, poems and plays. The approach in this syllabus calls for emphasis on the exposure of students 
to literature, not to the learning of facts about literary theory.
A reading list is included in the syllabus to offer help to schools in choosing class texts to develop the ability to 
enjoy literature. It is a list of suggested reading, not prescribed reading. It offers a guide to the range of 
material that is suitable for particular groups of students. Schools are encouraged to create situations which 
lead to wide reading by students.
There will, of course, be differences from territory to territory and even from school to school, so the 
recommendations must not be taken as binding in any way. It is hoped that students will be encouraged to 
read widely within the range of titles suggested both by the list and by the teacher’s own additions to it, and 
that class sessions and written assignments will be geared to stimulate and reward this extra reading of, and 
interest in literature. 
The reading list includes a number of reference texts on the teaching of drama. The approach to drama 
implicit in the syllabus places the emphasis on the use of activities such as miming, improvisations, the reading 
and acting of plays in the classroom that would help in the development of self awareness and understanding 
of others. The texts included in the suggested reading list will provide guidance in implementing this aspect 
of the drama programme, particularly in the first three years of secondary schooling.
♦ ENGLISH A AND B - NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES 
(FORMS 1 - 5)
Communicative competence is a critical issue in any classroom and is the focus of the aims outlined earlier in 
this syllabus. Students will be expected to demonstrate good control of the mechanisms of language, write 
good, clear prose, and to communicate easily, precisely and fluently. It is a sound instructional principle to 
practice the skills required to achieve these features within situations that simulate the social contexts as nearly 
as possible. The importance of the oral aspects of English A should be emphasised, even though these are 
currently not assessed by the Council. Schools are, therefore, encouraged to engage the oral aspects of English 
A. 
It is recommended that teachers in all subjects ensure that the English language competence of their students 
is satisfactory. With this in mind, it is suggested that teachers of English should provide guidance to teachers 
of other subjects with respect to the quality of English expected to be displayed, and that 5% of the marks for 
any assignment should be allocated to the quality of the language used in presenting the assignment, oral or 
written.
Suggested teaching activities are intended to guide teachers into a full understanding of the objectives of the 
syllabus, while offering ideas for both teaching and assessment activities. This list of activities is not 
prescribed, nor is it exhaustive.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 5 
ENGLISH A and B – NOTES AND SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
Understanding (a) – Grammar and Mechanics
Students should be able to:
1. explain meaning 
conveyed (both in 
listening and in 
reading) through 
word choice and 
grammar, and (in 
reading) through 
punctuation and 
paragraphing.
Word choice: 
formal, informal, non￾standard, Creole, literal, 
figurative use, fixed phrases, 
synonyms, antonyms, 
homonyms.
Wide reading (class 
library); shared newspaper, 
assessing alternative 
Internet sites, listening to 
effective speeches, oral 
skills; use of dictionary 
and thesaurus including e￾dictionary and e-thesaurus; 
word puzzles, word-a-day, 
vocabulary notebooks, word￾attack skills.
Cloze tests
Sentence completion
Synonyms
Antonyms
Definitions
Grammar: 
a. syntax – the ways in 
which words are 
ordered and connected 
to form phrases or 
sentences with 
particular meaning.
 
Grammar check in word 
processing. 
Explicit language 
comparison and 
substitution and 
restructuring drills (as in 
second-language teaching); 
critical listening and 
reading exercises; 
identifying sentence 
patterns, analysing fact, 
evaluating arguments and 
opinions.
Study and discussion of video 
extracts relating to (a) 
standard English spoken by 
Caribbean persons (b) by non 
Caribbean persons or (c) by 
Caribbean persons with non￾Caribbean influences, for 
example, (note word choice, 
check for agreement in 
grammar, common and 
different aspects of language 
use.
 
Listening and reading 
comprehension exercises, with 
answers dependent on the 
understanding of particular 
forms, structures, patterns.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 6 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
b. morphology – the ways 
in which the form of 
words and fixed phrases, 
and the changes made to 
them affect meaning.
Exercises to differentiate 
marking of number, 
possession, verb tense, 
adjective degree, pronoun 
reference, and word￾building. Use of word￾processing tools for editing.
As overleaf. 
 
Punctuation: 
recognition of punctuation 
marks and their effect on 
meaning – capital letter, 
question mark, exclamation 
mark, full stop, semi-colon, 
comma, colon, apostrophe, 
quotation marks, brackets, 
dash, hyphen, ellipsis.
Critical discussion and 
correction of punctuation 
used in selected and 
prepared material;
dictation; reading aloud to 
identify contribution of 
punctuation to meaning. 
Unpunctuated passages 
used to focus on links 
between punctuation and 
interpretation.
Dictation
Reading aloud to show 
appreciation of punctuation; 
Explaining the effects of 
punctuation marks in context; 
Paragraphing Justifying choice of topic 
sentences in paragraphs 
read or heard; making an 
outline from a given 
(magazine) article; 
evaluating colleague’s 
paragraphs, creation of 
dialogue and role play and 
other controlled oral 
activity, impromptu 
speech.
Using written material:
- identifying topic 
sentences; 
- explaining the effect of 
paragraphing in passages 
with and without 
dialogue; 
- similar exercises using 
oral materials or video;
Expression (a) – Grammar and Mechanics
Students should be able to:
1. use appropriate 
diction and 
grammatical forms 
(both in speaking 
and in writing) and 
suitable 
punctuation and 
paragraphing to 
convey meaning 
clearly and with 
facility.
Diction: 
appropriate diction 
matches word choice and
style to the purpose,
situation, audience and 
content of the written or 
spoken discourse; accurate 
use of words, fixed phrases, 
synonyms and antonyms is 
expected.
Use of dictionary and 
thesaurus including audio 
samples on e-dictionaries; 
creating word puzzles; 
Scrabble; word-a-day; 
vocabulary notebooks; 
rewriting items for 
different purpose and 
situation and audience; 
oral and written sentence 
completion and cloze 
exercises. 
Role play: (1) various 
professions 
(2) use of hierarchy -
Sentence completion and cloze 
tests
Word substitution
Structured writing or speaking 
task to test appropriate diction 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 7 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
(student/principal), worker 
/superior
(3) other relationships: 
civilian/law officer; sales 
clerk/customer.
Grammar: 
adjustment of grammatical form 
for flexibility as appropriate 
to audience and context, 
sentence functions
(statement, question) and
types (simple, compound), 
for accuracy: number, 
identification of subject, 
concord, pronoun reference, 
possessives, sequence of 
tenses.
Use of grammar check on 
Microsoft Word.
Practice in appropriately 
structuring and altering 
statements, questions; 
synthesis; building 
complex and compound, 
sentences. 
Oral, then written 
language comparison and 
restructuring drills; proof￾reading exercises to 
identify and correct errors 
of number, concord, 
reported speech, journal 
writing, oral interviews, 
impromptu speeches. 
Extended writing task to test 
use of suitable variety of 
sentences 
Synthesis 
Extended writing task to test 
accuracy in the statement of 
number and concord. Error 
recognition; error correction; 
Changing direct to reported 
speech; 
Punctuation: 
appropriate use of capital 
letter, questions mark, 
exclamation mark, full stop, 
semi-colon, comma, colon, 
apostrophe, quotation marks,
brackets, dash, hyphen, 
ellipsis.
Reading aloud; giving, 
taking dictation; proof￾reading exercises.
Extended writing task to test 
appropriate use of necessary 
punctuation marks
Dictation
Correcting an unpunctuated 
passage;
Paragraphing: 
logical division of 
continuous writing into 
coherent paragraphs; 
conventions of paragraphing 
shown in writing dialogue.
 
Outlining a composition 
by grouping brainstormed 
(or jumbled) ideas; oral 
and written expanding of 
topic sentences into 
paragraphs; adding 
properly sequenced 
paragraphs to create a 
longer work. Semantic 
mapping.
Listening to speech to 
recognise how the flow of 
ideas helps/hinders audience 
understanding and suggests 
organisation.
Listening to speech to note 
Extended writing task (essay, 
short story) to test effective 
paragraphing; 
Dividing passage into 
paragraphs; 
Correcting faulty paragraphing;
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 8 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
how natural chunking, 
pausing, voice change, suggest 
punctuation.
Understanding (b) – Informative Discourse
Students should be able to extract information accurately. This involves the ability to:
1. recognise facts 
stated explicitly;
As the first level of 
questioning, this requires a 
basic understanding of 
information presented 
directly in language to be 
taken literally.
Use of various subject 
textbooks, manuals, 
newspaper reports, 
notices, recipes, tables, 
charts, signs, maps, 
diagrams, audio and 
videotape.
Use of Internet articles on 
same/similar topics – 
analysis of views, and 
separation of facts from 
opinion.
Multiple choice, short-answer, 
oral questions re explicit 
information (read, heard or 
shown in a diagram). Who, 
what, where, when, why, how 
questions.
Following directions
2. extract specific 
information from 
what is read or 
heard;
Selection of relevant 
information, making use of 
titles, introductions, topic 
sentences, illustrations.
Note-taking; making 
outlines, summaries, 
paraphrases; given titles; 
formulating questions to 
elicit data.
Written and oral summaries, 
reports. Reporting data as 
diagrams, charts. Picking the 
outline from an article.
3. extract implied 
information;
Reading ‘between the lines’ 
(a critical skill) is used in 
interpreting information 
presented indirectly.
Making inferences from 
suitable passages, poems; 
deducing meaning of 
cartoons, and trends in 
charts, advertisement, 
other oral media and 
presentation.
Multiple choice, short-answer, 
or oral questions re implied 
information (read, heard, or 
seen in graphic).
 Listening/watching video: 
(i) make predictions based on 
speech, music, atmosphere, 
body language and on other 
behaviours (ii) study/ deduce 
character based on dress, 
behaviours, speech (iii) 
discussion on what ‘setting’ 
contributes to meaning: 
hearing and understanding, 
for example, influence of 
indoor/outdoor; social 
location, for example,
church/market.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 9 
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
4. identify stated or 
implied time 
sequence;
Important for following 
instructions and for making 
good sense of information 
received in confused order, 
as in flashbacks.
Re-ordering jumbled 
directions, picture 
sequences, planning 
activities; taking minutes 
of meetings; chronological 
listing of events in 
account; identifying cue￾words (first, second, next, 
then; dates).
Assessing the clarity of 
instructions on the labels of 
commercial products.
Following instructions, 
directions. Arranging (events 
recounted, pictured) in 
sequence. Numbering logical 
sequence.
5. draw valid 
conclusions and 
inferences from 
information 
presented;
Identifying sound and 
unsound deductions in 
particular examples, and 
generalisations from samples.
Recognising faulty 
reasoning and inadequate 
or biased samples in 
prepared explanations, 
reports.
Differentiating sound from 
unsound conclusions in given 
deductions and generalisations.
6. recognise cause￾effect relationships;
To be distinguished from 
coincidence to avoid false 
conclusions.
Identifying cause and 
effect (and coincidence) in 
stories, reports of events 
and experiments.
Identifying (or predicting) 
effect of given cause (and vice 
versa) in a passage (narrative or 
expository).
7. identify main and 
subordinate ideas 
and trace their 
development;
Structure seen through 
sequence of topics of 
individual paragraphs. 
Themes of longer works.
Note-taking; book-reports; 
analysing structure of 
paragraphs, short stories, 
novels, essays, oral 
narratives. Comparing 
novel with movie version.
Making summaries, outlines of 
items read or heard. 
Identifying themes in essay, 
story.
8. recognise the 
difference between 
denotative and 
connotative 
language;
Denotative (dictionary 
meaning) for literal, 
objective understanding; 
connotative (suggesting 
feelings) for subjective, 
emotional response.
Dictionary work;
comparison of similar 
information presented in 
contrasting styles; study of 
effect of word choice on 
slant, bias in oral and 
written narratives.
Differentiating between 
denotative and connotative 
language in prepared extracts. 
Giving unbiased equivalents of 
loaded terms.
9. identify passages in 
which the main 
purpose is 
informative 
(expository) rather 
than literary or 
persuasive;
Expository: to inform, 
explain; Literary: to 
entertain, stir feeling; 
Persuasive: to convince, 
direct.
Analysis of author’s 
purpose, and intended
audience; focus on 
elements of style which 
support informative 
purpose.
Choose expository extracts 
from a mixed selection; 
identify author’s precise 
purpose and intended 
audience.
 Watch/listen for denotative 
and connotative use of key 
words discussed before start of 
viewing/listening.
 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 10
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
10. interpret and 
respond to tables 
and pictorial 
communication, 
such as diagrams, 
conventional signs 
and symbols.
Verbal information is often 
supplemented.
Analysis of tables, charts, 
signs, maps, diagrams; 
converting the 
information to verbal 
form; making inferences 
from the data. 
Recognise and discuss 
trends; make predictions.
Identify signs on maps. 
Extract data; make inferences 
from tables, charts; summarise 
data in writing.
Continuous writing exercises, 
developing what is given in the 
visual. 
Expression (b) – Informative Discourse
Students should be able to:
1. communicate 
factual information 
clearly, concisely 
and adequately, in 
giving oral 
instructions, 
reports, summaries, 
and expositions in 
appropriate 
language.
Information discourse takes
various forms: essays,
summaries, reports, 
instructions
Clarity of instructions
depends upon precise 
language and careful 
sequencing of information.
Writing instructions, 
recipes; designing 
application forms; 
explaining how to play a 
game.
Exercises in giving/following 
oral instructions.
Writing directions and 
explaining how to operate an 
appliance.
Reports are expected to be
objective, accurate, 
comprehensive and helpfully 
organised.
Giving evidence to an 
investigator; reporting 
accident; oral or written 
reports of surveys, news 
reports, minutes.
Reporting a missing person; 
Reporting on a club project; 
A media report on a sports 
event; 
Press releases.
Summaries require economy 
of language, the careful
selection of relevant main 
ideas, and the preservation 
of the intention of the 
original.
Writing telegrams, 
classified advertisements, 
resumes, minutes of a 
meeting; summarising a 
radio news item; 
condensing a passage, 
isolating the views of one 
debater.
Condensing a newspaper 
report; 
Summarising one of the topics 
in a recorded conversation; 
Writing postcards.
Expositions give information
or explanation in an ordered 
manner, with supporting 
evidence for each element.
Writing notices, job 
applications, expository 
essays, completing forms, 
explaining how things 
work; preparing notes for 
informational talks.
Making oral reports on 
Describing yourself to a pen 
pal; 
explaining how a sewing 
machine or car engine works; 
Expository essays, for example: 
Outlining two main problems of 
youth today.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 11
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
set/observed activities; giving 
reasoned responses to 
situations; giving 
reports/assessing activities to 
be delivered in limited time 
and words.
Vocabulary “games” relevant 
to specific situations.
The appropriateness of 
language for communicating 
factual information is 
largely dependent on the 
degree of formality 
(register) expected by the 
listener or reader.
Classifying the above items 
according to the degree or 
formality expected; 
rewriting inappropriately 
written items. 
(Process writing 
encourages writers to 
generate and arrange 
ideas, to seek feedback and 
to draft and redraft, before 
final proofreading).
Identifying inappropriate 
language use in an item and 
supplying appropriate 
alternatives.
Understanding (c) – Literary Discourse
Students should be able to grasp insights from reading literature by:
1. deducing reasons 
and motives for 
particular spoken 
and written 
communications 
(other than those 
with an overt 
persuasive intent);
Distinguishing between the 
purpose of the writer, the 
speaker, and the narrator. 
The narrator’s or the 
persona’s voice is not 
necessarily the author’s; thus 
two motivations may exist in 
the same piece of writing.
Exposing students to a 
wide range of oral and 
written extracts, for 
example, biography, 
autobiography, narrator 
independent from author; 
author speaking through a 
character; poems, fables, 
satire, where characters are 
often not human. 
Imitating styles of piece 
studied.
Identifying voice; point of view 
and commenting on 
effectiveness.
2. appreciating the 
appropriateness of 
different uses of 
tone, mood, 
register, code and 
style in talks and 
speeches, and in 
literary forms 
(prose, verse and 
drama), in relation 
to the author’s 
intention;
Tone: attitude expressed by 
the speaker or “voice”, mood 
or atmosphere: emotion 
conveyed in a work; register: 
selection of language in 
indicating level of formality; 
code: language peculiar to a 
specific group; style: manner 
of statement, including form,
structure, language.
Reading and listening to a 
range of literary and non￾literary material, including 
poems, short stories, 
novels, plays, movies and 
TV items, newspaper, 
magazines, manuals. 
Identifying elements and 
evaluating their 
appropriateness. (This is 
an ongoing process, not 
restricted to English 
classes).
Reading and dramatising 
pieces; Writing evaluative 
comments.
Comparing and contrasting 
selections on the same issue, for 
example, literary and non-literary 
prose extracts; poems and drama 
extracts; poems and prose extracts.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 12
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
Interpretative dramatisation 
of selections (all genres). This 
is not limited to the original 
piece but must be allowed to 
include the students’ 
interpretations that may 
produce new versions. View 
DVDs with alternative 
conclusions and discuss 
changes in meaning effected.
3. detecting 
connotations in the 
use of words and in 
the presentation of 
ideas and 
distinguishing 
between 
connotative and 
denotative 
meaning; 
Connotative: emotional, 
cultural, social associations 
given to words; 
Denotative: standard 
meaning necessary for 
precise understanding of 
meaning. (See also 
Understanding (b) 8 overleaf). 
 
Learning effective use of 
dictionary; exploring 
meanings of words in 
current use; slang, jargon; 
studying effect of word 
choice and shades of 
meaning on slant and bias 
in speech or writing (for 
example, about gender, 
race, politics, religion, 
culture). 
Regular practice in 
identifying and assessing 
the effects of an increasing 
range of devices; students 
creating effects by using 
their own devices in 
descriptive writing. 
Small group activities: 
reading circles and book 
clubs; Book reviews.
Ranking words according to 
their negative and positive 
connotations;
Identifying bias in given 
examples;
Identifying reasons for effect 
produced in examples of biased 
writing or speech. 
4. detecting and 
assessing the apt use 
of devices such as 
pun, innuendo, 
exaggeration, irony 
and symbolism;
Importance of 
understanding why a 
particular device is used and 
its effect on meaning.
Reading specifically to detect 
hidden meanings. Listening 
to song lyrics (for example: 
calypso, dub) to understand 
meanings.
Identifying and explaining the 
effect of devices in given 
written passages, oral extracts.
5. recognising and 
responding to the 
appropriateness or 
otherwise of the 
medium, including 
form and structure, 
used by a speaker, 
director or author 
to achieve the 
intended effect of a 
talk or speech, 
letter, article or 
Identification and use of 
verse, stanza, dialogue, 
reported speech, 
punctuation, formal and 
informal writing, first and 
third person narratives, 
flashbacks, acts, stage 
directions.
Exposure to a variety of 
material to show the range 
of forms and structure 
found in written and 
spoken statement.
Study of folk expressions – 
West Indian and others (all 
contributors to Caribbean 
culture). 
Identifying and describing 
form and structure found in 
given examples; Imitating 
models of form and structure 
with new content.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 13
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
essay, poem, novel, 
story or play; 
6. visualising the 
situation, attitudes, 
mood and setting of 
a play and 
appreciating how 
they influence the 
actions and 
interaction of actors 
in the performance 
of that play;
Recognition of the 
importance of the director 
and actors to the 
interpretation of a script; the 
need for the reader of a play 
to visualise it in 
performance.
Seeing a play or film 
(especially one that has 
been read) performed on 
stage or screen; Acting 
parts of a play in class; 
practice in reading parts; 
investigating aspects of 
putting on plays: casting, 
set design, costumes, 
props, advertising.
Internet research to locate 
and study pictures of 
unfamiliar places; 
Visits to galleries/study of 
print/photo collections.
Identifying and explaining 
differences between a text and 
movie of the text;
Explaining links between 
setting, action, motives, 
character;
Directing a scene with fellow 
students.
7. recognising implicit 
themes;
Theme: a dominant view, or 
one of the recurring ideas, 
stated or implied in a work, 
for example, love, jealousy, 
heroism, freedom.
Identifying and defining 
underlying ideas in a text 
in small groups or 
individually. 
Identifying and tracing themes; 
Assessing a theme’s importance 
to the plot, with supporting 
evidence.
8. responding to good 
literature (West 
Indian and other 
literature in 
English): novels 
short stories, poems 
and plays; making 
critical appraisal of 
values and 
concepts
expressed in 
literature, and 
relating these to
everyday living.
Literature – a reflection of 
life-experience as well as a 
vicarious extension and 
enrichment of it; a means of 
evaluating personal values 
and those expressed in 
literature, and sometimes 
forming new values.
Identifying (in group 
discussion and individual 
writing) values 
encountered in texts; 
evaluate them on (a) 
personal, (b) social, and (c) 
ethical levels.
Identifying values expressed in 
texts; Assessing these with 
reasons and supporting 
opinions; 
Assessing identity of a 
character and explaining 
motivation.
Expression (c) – Literary Discourse
Students should derive aesthetic satisfaction from creative writing by:
1. organising and 
sequencing ideas to 
Exploring various forms of 
self-statement, spoken and 
Writing and reading 
stories, verse, dramatic Submitting outline, drafts and 
fair copy of imaginative piece, 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 14
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
communicate 
emotions and 
imaginative 
interpretations of 
experience;
written, give opportunities 
for development and 
discovery; this applies 
particularly when efforts are 
shared, and benefit from 
audience feedback, and 
revision.
scenes, possibly after 
discussion of personal 
experience, a topical event, 
or some other stimulus.
for assessment of both final 
product and process of writing; 
Practising independent 
revision of imaginative writing 
done under test conditions.
2. recognise the 
various literary 
devices and their 
contribution to 
meaning and 
demonstrate an 
ability to interpret, 
at various levels 
different creative 
works.
Metaphors, simile, proverbs 
and other idiomatic 
expressions across genres.
Discussion of meaning in 
works which use the 
devices well; 
Assessment of such devices 
and their contribution to 
meaning.
(See Understanding c Item 4). 
Identify the devices as used in 
various works; 
Creating short stories/poems 
which use and respond to such 
devices. 
Reading aloud to demonstrate 
understanding of the work 
which use the devices. 
3. using language 
(tone, mood, 
register, code and 
style) appropriate to 
particular situations 
and contexts.
Effective speech and writing 
both depend on the 
suitability of word choice 
and style to the subject, to 
the situation, and to the 
people being addressed.
See tone, mood, register, 
code and style in 
Understanding 2 overleaf.
Evaluating different 
imaginative and real 
situations to determine 
what use of language is 
appropriate for narrator, 
character.
Writing relevant statements in 
language suited to different 
speakers, situations.
Understanding (d) Persuasive Discourse
Students should be able to recognise and evaluate opinion(s) expressed in various forms. This involves the ability to: 
 
 
1. distinguish factual 
statements from 
opinion expressed 
in various forms;
If assertions are capable of 
being verified (factual, even 
if shown to be false), the 
appeal is to reason and the 
audience can use its 
judgment; if opinions are 
given without grounds which 
can be verified then they are 
unreliable.
Identifying and analyzing 
statements of different 
kinds of prepared passages, 
and in advertisements, 
letters to the editor, 
reviews, sports reports; 
removing all but logical 
arguments from prepared 
persuasive passage, 
listening to and viewing 
tapes of speeches.
Reading court reports and 
reports on trials.
Studying short proposals, 
paying attention to structure 
and reasoning.
Identifying verifiable and 
unverifiable statements in a 
passage. Judging the 
soundness of selected verifiable 
assertions. Identifying the 
more reasonable (logically 
presented) of two persuasive 
passages.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 15
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
2. detect connotations 
in the use of words 
and in the 
presentation of 
ideas;
Bias and slant may be 
detected in the choice of 
words, especially those 
carrying relevant 
connotations.
Discussion of the effect of 
loaded expressions in 
advertisements and other 
persuasive material.
Comparing two accounts 
of the same event and 
descriptions of the same 
scene from different points of 
view.
Identifying and evaluating the 
persuasive effect of given 
devices.
3. evaluate the 
effectiveness of 
language devices 
used to persuade;
Rhetorical questions, 
repetitions, hyperbole, 
litotes, irony, sarcasm, 
paradox, oxymoron, pathetic 
fallacy, rhyme and other 
devices of sound, and 
figurative language.
Identifying each device in 
persuasive material 
provided, discussing 
persuasive effects in 
context.
Identifying and evaluating the 
persuasive effect of given 
devices.
4. recognise the range 
of techniques of 
persuasion 
employed in social 
intercourse and by 
the mass media and 
assess the persuasive 
effects.
Appeals to authority, desires, 
fears and other emotions; 
use of statistics; association 
of ideas; contrast, ridicule; 
rhetorical questions and 
other language devices; 
visual and auditory effects.
Discuss likely reasons for 
the use of particular 
techniques in 
advertisements and 
campaigns; identify 
various techniques in 
persuasive material 
recalled or shown in class.
Study proposals and reports to 
see how tables, charts are 
used.
Using the Internet, study 
video clips to note how visuals 
are used to persuade.
Identifying examples of 
techniques in given persuasive 
items; explaining the purpose 
of the technique used in a 
given example; analysing and 
assessing the effectiveness of a 
piece of persuasive language.
 
Expression (d) – Persuasive Discourse
Students should be able to communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or dissuades 
effectively, namely:
1. present reasoned 
evaluative 
comments on 
Reasoned opinions draw 
their conclusions logically on 
the basis of facts. Giving 
Supporting opinions with 
reasons; providing sound 
reasons for agreeing or 
Stating a position for example 
on new transport and traffic 
proposals, community projects 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 16
SPECIFIC
OBJECTIVES
EXPLANATORY NOTES SUGGESTIONS FOR 
TEACHING
SUGGESTIONS FOR 
ASSESSMENT
proposals and 
situations of various 
kinds, in language 
that is clear and 
appropriate to the 
occasion;
opinions, which others may 
not agree with, requires fact.
disagreeing with 
suggestions; practising 
inoffensive ways of 
complaining, disagreeing.
Preparing persuasive 
arguments for specific contexts
(home/school). 
Constructing and supporting 
proposals. 
Role play (impromptu) 
arguments for and against.
and institutions) orally (in a 
meeting) or in a letter to the 
newspaper Editor.
2. demonstrate the 
ability to employ, 
wherever necessary, 
a range of 
persuasive 
techniques for 
emotional impact;
Psychological persuasion is 
used, not only to manipulate 
people into buying goods or 
supporting beliefs, but to 
warn those in danger and to 
strengthen those in distress.
Advertising a product (a) 
deceptively and (b) 
responsibly, identifying 
situations where 
persuasion targeting 
emotions may be justified; 
practising such persuasion 
in speech and writing.
Writing advertising copy to 
dissuade children from using 
illegal drugs; writing to a 
disillusioned teenaged relative 
to persuade him or her not to 
give up hope.
3. present a logical 
argument using 
justifiable 
techniques related 
to sound or a hand 
written debate.
Serious argumentative essays 
and speeches emphasise 
reason over emotion, though 
they may be made more 
attractive by the occasional 
use of emotive appeals. Both 
sides of an issue are 
recognised, and the writer 
makes his or her stance clear.
Practice in generalising 
from appropriate evidence, 
and deducing logically 
from facts, debating issues, 
and writing items to 
persuade with a minimum 
of emotional appeal, and 
with opposing views noted 
and answered.
Writing argumentative essay, 
letters, and media articles and 
commentaries.
Discussing the effectiveness of 
chosen advertisements.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 17
♦ OTHER ENGLISH A EXAMINATION
Candidates taking this subject will not be required to submit an SBA. They will be assessed by external 
examination only. Mastery of knowledge and skills embodied in the subject content will be assessed under 
two profile dimensions. 
1. Profile Dimension 1: Understanding
The skills to be examined under this profile dimension are the ability to:
(a) understand meaning conveyed in reading, through word choice, grammar, punctuation 
and paragraphing, and to obtain information accurately;
(b) grasp insights from reading literature;
(c) evaluate opinions expressed in various forms.
2. Profile Dimension 2: Expression
The skills to be examined under this profile dimension are the ability to:
(a) communicate factual information clearly, concisely, and adequately in giving written
instructions, reports, summaries, and expositions in appropriate language;
(b) give aesthetic satisfaction to others in personal, creative and imaginative language;
(c) communicate personal opinion clearly and cogently in language which persuades or 
dissuades effectively.
As the syllabus implies, all students have the same basic language needs and will be called on in social 
intercourse to utilise the same range of language skills.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 18
OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH A
Paper 01 (1 hour 30 minutes - 24% of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper 
This paper consists of 60 compulsory multiple-choice items arranged in two sections. Section One
consists of 20 discrete items and Section Two consists of 40 reading comprehension items based on 
five stimuli as follows:
one poem; one narrative extract; one expository extract; one persuasive extract (for example, an advertisement or a 
speech or a letter to the editor); one visual extract (for example, tables, diagrams, maps, conventional sign and 
symbols, cartoons, advertisement).
 
2. Mark Allocation
(a) One mark will be assigned for each question.
(b) The total number of marks available for this paper is 60.
(c) This paper contributes 24% towards the final assessment.
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 1 as follows: 
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to understand meaning conveyed through
word choice, grammar, syntax, sentence structure, punctuation and paragraphing.
In Section Two, marks will be awarded for the ability to (i) obtain information accurately, (ii) grasp 
insights from reading literature and (iii) recognise and evaluate opinions expressed in various 
forms.
Paper 02 (2 hours and 30 minutes – 76% of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper
This paper is divided into the following four sections:
Section One consists of one compulsory question.
Section Two consists of two compulsory short-answer reading comprehension questions.
Section Three consists of three questions. Two questions require candidates to produce short 
stories and one requires a descriptive essay. Candidates must do only one of the three questions.
Section Four consists of two argumentative essay questions. Candidates must attempt one 
question.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 19
2. Mark Allocation
(a) Section One is worth 30 marks.
(b) Each reading comprehension test in Section Two is worth 15 marks (total 30 marks).
(c) Section Three is worth 35 marks.
(d) Section Four is worth 35 marks. 
(e) This paper is worth 130 marks, and contributes 76% towards the final assessment. 
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 1, as follows:
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to:
(a) use appropriate grammatical forms, and suitable punctuation and paragraphing to convey 
meaning clearly and with facility;
(b) communicate factual information clearly, concisely, and adequately in written instructions, 
reports and summaries in appropriate language.
In Section Two, marks will be awarded for the candidate’s ability to: 
(c) understand meaning conveyed in reading, through word choice, grammar, punctuation 
and paragraphing; 
(d) obtain information accurately;
(e) grasp insights from reading literature; and 
(f) recognise and evaluate opinions expressed in various forms.
Marks will be awarded under Profile Dimension 2, as follows:
 
In Section One, marks will be awarded for the ability to (i) use appropriate grammatical forms, and 
suitable punctuation and paragraphing to convey meaning clearly and with facility and (ii) use 
appropriate language and communicate factual information clearly, concisely and adequately in writing 
reports and summaries. 
 
In Section Three, marks will be awarded for the ability to give aesthetic satisfaction to others in 
personal, creative and imaginative language.
In Section Four, marks will be awarded for the ability to communicate personal opinion clearly 
and cogently in language which effectively persuades or dissuades.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 20
Tables 1 and 2 present a summary of the assessment scheme for the English A Syllabus. 
Assessment Grids for English A Examinations
Table 1 - Marks Allocated to Examination Components
Paper Component 
(Questions)
Profile 1 
Understanding 
Profile 2 
Expression
EXAMINATION
01 1-60 60 (24%) - 60 (24%)
02 
Section I (Qu. 1) 10 (4%) 20 (13.33%) 30 (17.33%)
Section II (Qu. 2, 3) 30 (12%) - 30 (12%)
Section III (Qu. 4,5,6) - 35 (23.33%) 35 (23.33%)
Section IV (Qu. 7,8) - 35 (23.33%) 35 (23.33%)
EXAMINATION - 100 (40%) 90 (60%) 190 (100%)
Marks in Table 1 above are weighted so that they contribute to the overall examinations the proportions 
shown in Table 2 below.
Table 2 - Weighting of Examination Components - English A
Profile 1
Understanding
Profile 2
Expression
Composite
Paper 01
(1 hour 30 minutes) 24% - 24%
Paper 02 
(2 hours 30 minutes) 16% 60% 76%
Examination 
(4 hours) 40% 60% 100%
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 21
♦ THE ENGLISH B EXAMINATION
INTRODUCTION 
In English B, teachers guide students to explore how writers, poets and dramatists craft their work to influence our 
feelings and thoughts about life. Literature is a storehouse of humankind’s collective imagination and ideas. As 
teachers guide students to explore the rich world of literature they are confronted with many facets of the human 
experience as presented by literary artists. Historical, current or future events may stimulate them to peer into the 
mirror of shared psychological and social realities. This exposure supports students forging national and personal 
identities and creates a heightened sense of appreciation for the commonalities and differences in our human experience.
 
The exploration of literature is intended to foster students’ awareness on how writers create their literary worlds; to 
encourage students to make critical evaluations of those attitudes, values and beliefs that are portrayed and to develop 
in students a sense of empathy as they see their own humanity reflected in literary characters and situations.
EXAMINATION
The English B examination is intended to provide a test of the skills outlined below and those general skills 
listed on page 3 of the syllabus under Understanding (c). Together with the English A examinations, this will 
provide a complete test of the full range of skills which the integrated syllabus is designed to develop.
It is designed to be a test of candidates’ acquisition of those skills that would enable them to understand how 
literature functions and to pursue the study of literature at an advanced level.
The examination is designed to test a range of skills which include:
1. the ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgements, states of consciousness and 
other concepts explored in literature, and to relate these to everyday living;
2. description (the outlining of relevant content), analysis (the ability to break down, select and comment on 
the significance of relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to bring together and condense in a new 
form information drawn from various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular 
question);
3. the ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses 
in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism;
4. the ability to produce balanced critical analyses;
5. the ability to recognise the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour); 
6. the ability to recognise and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text;
7. the ability to grasp concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 22
OUTLINE OF ASSESSMENT: ENGLISH B
English B is assessed under three profile dimensions: Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction.
1. Profile Dimension 1 – Drama
This profile dimension will emphasise the study, teaching, and understanding of drama as a 
discrete literary genre. Although, it shares literary elements with the other literary genres, it possesses 
elements that are unique to drama, for example:
(a) performance as its main vehicle;
(b) stage directions;
(c) character; 
(d) spectacle;
(e) the development of character, theme, and atmosphere through elements such as lighting 
costuming, stage prop. 
Such dramatic elements ought to be the primary focus of teaching and study.
2. Profile Dimension 2 – Poetry
This profile dimension will emphasise the study, teaching, and understanding of poetry as a 
discrete literary genre. Although, it shares literary elements with the two other literary genres, there 
are elements specific to poetry, such as:
(a) fixed forms, metre, rhythm and rhyme;
(b) the economy of language;
(c) the organic relationship between sound and sense;
(d) the figurative language employed to give the poem levels of meaning. 
Such elements ought to be the primary focus of the teaching and study of poetry.
3. Profile Dimension 3 – Prose Fiction
Prose Fiction is more often than not the most expansive and experimental of the literary genres and 
it is for many the most accessible. Following are some of the elements of prose fiction that must be 
studied, taught, and understood: 
(a) narrative technique and the use of first-person and third-person narrators;
(b) structure, that is, the way in which a work of prose fiction is put together, for example, 
whether it is an unbroken narrative, or a narrative divided into chapters, or into larger 
sections or more than one narrative put together to form a longer narrative; 
(c) the difference between narration and description;
(d) the presentation of humankind in a social setting;
(e) characterisation; 
(f) themes. 
Such elements ought to be the primary focus of the teaching and study of the novel and the short 
story.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 23
In each of the three literary genres the following skills will be tested:
1. Understanding
Knowledge of Text and Insight
 
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of examples 
2. Expression
(a) Organisation of Response
(i) Structure and development of responses
(ii) Clear and logical argument
(b) Quality of Language
(i) Clarity and appropriateness of expression used
(ii) Mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling)
ASSESSMENT DETAILS 
Paper 01 (1 hour 30 minutes - 36 % of Total Assessment)
1. Composition of Paper 
 All questions are compulsory. This paper will consist of three questions, one question from each 
genre – drama, poetry and prose fiction. In each question candidates will be required to give 
approximately 5 - 7 short answers. 
 
2. Mark Allocation
(a) Twenty marks will be allocated for each question in this paper.
(b) The total number of marks available for this paper is 60. 
(c) This paper contributes 36% to the whole examination.
3. Award of Marks
Marks will be awarded in each profile dimension for relevance and accuracy of content, relevance 
and accuracy of illustration, and quality and clarity of argument.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 24
Paper 02 (2 hours – 64% of Total Assessment) – (reading time – 10 minutes) 
1. Composition of Paper 
This paper is divided into the three sections:
(a) Section ONE – Drama (Shakespeare and Modern Drama). This section consists of four 
Type A questions, two from each text. Thirty-five marks are allocated for each question. 
Candidates must answer one question from this section.
(b) Section TWO – Poetry (a selection of poems – two questions). This section consists of two 
Type B questions, one generic question allowing candidates to use two appropriate choices from the 
prescribed poems and one question based on two named poems from the prescribed list. Thirty-five
marks are allocated for each question. Candidates must answer one question from this 
section.
(c) Section THREE – Prose Fiction (EITHER West Indian novel OR other novels in English 
OR West Indian short story and other short stories in English). This section consists of six 
questions: four Type A questions, two on each prescribed novel and two Type B questions, one 
generic question allowing candidates to use two appropriate choices from the prescribed short stories 
and one question based on two named short stories from the prescribed list. Thirty-five marks are 
allocated for each question. Candidates must answer one question from this section.
2. Number of Questions
This paper consists of 12 optional extended-essay questions arranged under the three sections 
outlined above. There are two types of questions in this paper:
Type A - Questions that require knowledge and study of one text;
Type B – Questions of comparison that require knowledge and study of two poems or short stories.
Candidates will be required to answer a total of THREE questions, one from EACH section. 
3. Mark Allocation
Each question will be worth 35 marks. This paper is worth 105 marks. 
4. Award of Marks
Candidates are expected to show knowledge, insight, quality of argument, and organisation of 
response. 
Marks will be awarded for relevance and accuracy of content, relevance and accuracy of illustration 
and quality and clarity of argument. Marks will also be awarded for the structure and development 
of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs, and for competence in the mechanics of 
writing.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 25
Organisation of Paper 02 
Drama [Section One]
Question 1 Type A question [35 marks] 
Question 2 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 3 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 4 Type A question [35 marks]
Poetry [Section Two]
Question 1 Type B question [35 marks]
Question 2 Type B question [35 marks]
Prose Fiction [Section Three] Novel
Question 1 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 2 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 3 Type A question [35 marks]
Question 4 Type A question [35 marks]
Short Stories
Question 5 Type B question [35 marks]
Question 6 Type B question [35 marks]
The outline of the assessment scheme above and Table 1 overleaf are presented to describe and summarise 
the assessment design for English B.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 26
Relevant to 2012 – 2017 Assessment Grids for English B Examination Table 1: Marks Allocated to Examination Components Proficiency Profile Paper 01 Paper 02 Composite General
Drama 20 
(12.12%)
35 
(21.21%)
55 
(33.33%)
Poetry 20 
(12.12%)
35 
(21.21%)
55 
(33.33%)
Prose Fiction 20 
(12.12%
35 
(21.21%)
 55 
 (33.33%)
Total 60 
(36%)
105 
(64%)
165 
(100%)
Time 1 hour 30 minutes 2 hours 10 minutes 3 hours 40 minutes
Table 2: Weighting of Examination Components – English B
 Drama Poetry Prose Fiction Components
Paper 01 1 hour 30 minutes 12.12% 12.12% 12.12% 36% 
Paper 02 2 hours 10 minutes 21.21% 21.21% 21.21% 64% 
Examination 3 hours 40 minutes 33.33% 33.33% 33.33% 100%
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 27
♦ PRESCRIBED TEXTS FOR ENGLISH B
TEXTS PRESCIBED FOR THE 2012 - 2014 EXAMINATIONS ARE AS FOLLOWS
TEXT AUTHOR OR EDITOR DRAMA Four Questions will be set
A Midsummer Night’s Dream William Shakespeare
Old Story Time Trevor Rhone
POETRY 
Two Questions will be set
Selections from A World of Poetry for CXC Hazel Simmons-McDonald and
(New Edition) Mark McWatt
Poems Prescribed for the 2012 – 2014 Examinations are as Follows Two type B Questions will be set TEXT AUTHOR
A Contemplation Upon Flowers Henry King
Once Upon a Time Gabriel Okara
Forgive My Guilt Robert P. Tristram Coffin
West Indies, U.S.A. Stewart Brown
Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge William Wordsworth
Orchids Hazel Simmons-McDonald
The Woman Speaks to the Man who has Lorna Goodison
 Employed Her Son 
It is the Constant Image of your Face Dennis Brutus
God’s Grandeur Gerard Manley Hopkins
A Stone’s Throw Elma Mitchell
Test Match Sabina Park Stewart Brown
Theme for English B Langston Hughes
Dreaming Black Boy James Berry
Epitaph Dennis Scott
Dulce et Decorum Est Wilfred Owen
This is the Dark Time, My Love Martin Carter
Ol’Higue Mark McWatt
‘Le Loupgarou’ Derek Walcott
South Kamau Brathwaite
To an Athlete Dying Young A.E. Housman
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 28
PROSE FICTION 
Novel – Four Type A questions will be set. West Indian
Songs of Silence Curdella Forbes
The Wine of Astonishment Earl Lovelace
Short Story - Two Type B Questions will be set from the ten named short stories 
Selections from A World of Prose for CXC David Williams and
(New Edition) Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Short Stories Prescribed for the 2012 – 2014 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
Blackout Roger Mais
Shabine Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Emma Carolyn Cole
The Man of the House Frank O’Connor
Septimus John Wickham
The Day the World Almost Came to an End Pearl Crayton
The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream Olive Senior
Berry Langston Hughes
Mom Luby and the Social Worker Kristin Hunter
To Da-duh, in Memoriam Paule Marshall
 
TEXTS PRESCRIBED FOR THE 2015 – 2017 EXAMINATIONS ARE AS 
FOLLOWS
TEXT AUTHOR DRAMA 
Four Type A Questions will be set
Julius Caesar William Shakespeare
The Lion and the Jewel Wole Soyinka
POETRY Two Type B Questions will be set
Selections from A World of Poetry Hazel Simmons-McDonald and 
(New Edition) Mark McWatt
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 29
Poems Prescribed for the 2015 – 2017 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
A Contemplation Upon Flowers Henry King
Once Upon a Time Gabriel Okara
Forgive My Guilt Robert P. Tristram Coffin
West Indies, U.S.A. Stewart Brown
Sonnet Composed Upon Westminister Bridge William Wordsworth
Orchids Hazel Simmons-McDonald
The Woman Speaks to the Man who has Lorna Goodison 
 Employed Her Son 
It is the Constant Image of your Face Dennis Brutus
A Lesson for this Sunday Derek Walcott
A Stone’s Throw Elma Mitchell
Test Match Sabina Park Stewart Brown
Theme for English B Langston Hughes
Dreaming Black Boy James Berry
Death Came to see me in Hot Pink Pants Heather Royes
Dulce et Decorum Est Wilfred Owen
This is the dark time, my love Martin Carter
Ol’Higue Mark McWatt
‘Le Loupgarou’ Derek Walcott
South Kamau Brathwaite
Because I could not stop for Death Emily Dickinson
PROSE FICTION Novel – Four Type A questions will be set.
Frangipani House Beryl Gilroy
Things Fall Apart Chinua Achebe
Short Story - Two Type B questions will be set from the ten named short stories.
Selections from A World of Prose for CXC David Williams and
(New Edition) Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Short Stories Prescribed for the 2015 – 2017 Examinations are as Follows TEXT AUTHOR
Raymond’s Run Tony Cade Bambara
Shabine Hazel Simmons-McDonald
Emma Carolyn Cole
The Man of the House Frank O’Connor
Georgia and Them There United States Velma Pollard
The Day the World Almost Came to an End Pearl Crayton
The Two Grandmothers Olive Senior
Berry Langston Hughes
Mom Luby and the Social Worker Kristin Hunter
To Da-duh, in Memoriam Paule Marshall 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 30
♦ SUGGESTED READING LIST 
(For selecting literature for class study and library reading)
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
NOVELS
Achebe, Chinua Arrow of God Heinemann 5 
Adams, Douglas The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the 
Galaxy
Ballantine Books of 
Canada
3 and 4 
Adams, Richard Watership Down Penguin 3, 4 and 5
Adler, Elizabeth The King's Shadow Tandem Library 4 and 5
Aidoo, Ama The Dilemma of a 
Ghost/Anowa
Longman 4 and 5
Aiken, Joan Night Fall Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston
4
Akpabot, Anne Aduke Makes Her Choice Nelson 4 and 5
Alcott, Louisa May Eight Cousins 1st World Library Literary 
Society
1 and 2
Allen, Eric The Latchkey Children Heinemann Educational 1 
Allende, Isabel City of the Beasts Harper Collins 3, 4 and 5 
Altmann, Martina Jeremiah, Devil of the Woods Pan Macmillan 1 and 2
Amadi, Elechi The Concubine Heinemann 4 and 5 
Amis, Kingsley Lucky Jim Victor Gollancz 4 and 5
Anaya, Rudolfo Bless Me, Ultima Grand Central Publishing 4 and 5
Angelou, Maya I Know Why the Caged Bird 
Sings
Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Anne, Frank Centre Anne Frank: Beyond the 
Diary
Puffin 4 and 5
Anthony, Michael Green Days by the River Heinemann 4 and 5
Apple, Arnold Son of Guyana Oxford University Press 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 31
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Armstrong, William H. Sounder HarperCollins 1 and 2
Austen, Jane Emma Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Ba, Marianna So Long a Letter Heinemann 5 
Bagnold, Enid National Velvet Morrow 1 
Baldwin, James Go Tell It on the Mountain Delta Trade Paperbacks 
 
5 
Ballard, J. Empire of the Sun Heinemann 3
Banks, Lynne Reid One More River Valentine, Mitchell 3
Blume, Judy Are You There God? It's Me, 
Margaret
Simon & Schuster 
Children’s Publishing
1 and 2
Bosse, Malcolm J. Ganesh Crowell 3
Braithwaite, E.R. To Sir With Love Signet Book 3 and 4
Brickhill, Paul The Dam Busters W. W. Norton 4 and 5 
Brontë, Charlotte Jane Eyre Penguin 4 and 5
Brontë, Emily Wuthering Heights Signet Classic 4 and 5 
Burnett, F. Hodgson The Secret Garden Signet Classic 1 
Butler, Octavia Kindred Beacon Press 4 and 5 
Byars, Betsy Cracker Jackson Puffin 1, 2, and 3 
Byrne, Donn Gandhi Longman 4 and 5 
Carpenter, Richard Catweazle Penguin 1 and 2
Carroll, Lewis Alice in Wonderland Digital Scanning Inc. 1
Chambers, Aidan The Present Takers Harper & Row 3, 4 and 5
Chesterton, G. K. The Man Who was Thursday Penguin 3 and 4
Chinodya, Shimmer Harvest of Thorns Heinemann 4 and 5
Christopher, John The Guardians Hamish Hamilton 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 32
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Cisneros, Sandra The House on Mango Street Vintage Books 2 and 3
Clarke, Arthur Dolphin Island Gollancz 1 and 2 
Cleary, Beverly Fifteen HarperCollins 2 
Cliff, Michelle Abeng Plume 4 and 5 
Collins, Merle Angel Seal Press 4 and 5 
Conly, Jane Lesley Rasco and Rats of Nimh Heinemann New 
windmills, Puffin
1, 2 and 3
Conrad, Joseph Lord Jim Courier Dover 
Publications
5
Cooper, J. California Family Anchor Books 4 and 5
Cooper, Susan Over Sea. Under Stone Puffin 1 and 2
Coppard, Yvonne Not Dressed Like that You 
Don’t
Piccadilly Press Ltd. 3
Cormier, Robert I am the Cheese Alfred Aknopf 5
Crane, Stephen The Red Badge of Courage Prentice Hall 5 
Craven, Margaret I Heard the Owl Call My 
Name
Dell 4 and 5 
D’Costa, Jean Escape to Last Man Peak Longman 1 
Dahl, Roald Matilda Penguin 1 
Darke, Marjorie The First of Midnight
A Long Way to Go
Seabury Press
Kestrel Books
3
3 
De Jong, Mendert The House of Sixty Fathers
The Wheel on the School
Harper & Row
Harper & Row
1 and 2
De Lisser, Herbert Jane's Career Heinemann 4 and 5
Defoe, Daniel Robinson Crusoe (Abridged) Penguin 2, 3 and 4
Desai, Anita The Village by the Sea Chivers 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 33
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Dickens, Charles A Christmas Carol
David Copperfield
(Abridged)*
Great Expectations
Oliver Twist (Abridged)
Macmillan
Gerald Duckworth & Co.
Pearson Education
Barnes & Noble
2 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
*Contained in the classics published by Longmans.
Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan The Hound of the Baskervilles
The Return of Sherlock 
Holmes
Penguin
1st World Publishing
3
3 
Drayton, Godfrey Christopher Heinemann 1,2 and 3
Duder, Tessa Alex Oxford University Press 3
Dumas, Alexandre The Three Musketeers Wildside 2
Durrel, Gerald Three Singles to Adventure F.A. Thorpe 2
Edgell, Zee Beka Lamb
The Festival of San Joaquin
Heinemann
Heinemann
3, 4 and 5 
4 and 5
Ellison, Ralph The Invisible Man Sparknotes 5 
Ekwensi, Cyprian Burning Grass Heinemann 3 and 4 
Eliot, George Silas Marner: The Weaver of 
Raveloe
Kessinger 5 
Emecheta, Buchi The Joys of Motherhood Heinemann 4 and 5 
Fairclough, Peter Three Gothic Novels Penguin 4 and 5 
Faulkner, William Sanctuary Vintage International 4 and 5
Fisk, Nicholas Trillions Nelson 2
Fitzgerald, F. Scott The Great Gatsby Demco Media 5
Fitzhugh, Louise Harriet the Spy Random House Children 
Books
1
Forbes, Curdella Songs of Silence Heinemann 4 and 5
Foster, E. M. A Passage to India Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich
5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 34
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Francis, Dick Odds Against Berkley 4 and 5 
Gallico, Paul Jennie
The Small Miracle
The Snow Goose
Penguin
Doubleday
Knopf
1 
1 
1 
Garnett, Eve The Family from One-End 
Street
Further Adventures of the 
Family from One End Street
F. Muller
Penguin
1 
1 
George, Jean My Side of the Mountain Thorndike 1
Gilmore, Kate Of Griffins and Graffiti Penguin 3
Gilroy, Beryl Frangipani House
Boy Sandwich
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Godden, Rumer Listen to the Nightingale
Thursday’s Children
Penguin
Viking
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Goldsmith, Oliver The Vicar of Wakefield Wordsworth 4 and 5 
Gordimer, Nadine July’s Children Longman 4 and 5 
Grahame, Kenneth The Wind in the Willows Heinemann New 
Windmills, Methuen, 
Puffin, Wordsworth 
Publishers
1 and 2 
Green, Roger Lancelyn The Adventures of Robin 
Hood
King Arthur and His Knights 
of the Round Table
Myths of the Norsemen
Tales of Ancient Egypt
Tales of the Greek Heroes
The Luck of Troy
The Tale of Troy
Puffin
Penguin
Penguin
Sagebrush
Penguin
Penguin
Penguin
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Greene, Graham The Fallen Idol/The Third 
Man 
The Heart of the Master
Penguin
Heinmann, Mandarin, 
Penguin
4 and 5
5 
Guy, Rosa And I Heard A Bird Sing
Paris, Peewee and Big Dog
Delacorte
Orion 
3, 4 and 5
1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 35
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
The Disappearance Tandem 5
Haddon, Mark The Curious Incident of the Dog 
in the Night-time
Alexandria 4 and 5
Haggard, H. Rider King Solomon's Mines Wildside 3 
Hardy, Thomas Far from the Madding Crowd
The Mayor of Casterbridge
Tess of the D’Urbervilles
Plain Label 
Norton 
Reprint Services 
Corporation
4 and 5 
5 
5 
Harold, Gwyneth Bad Girls in School Heinemann 4 and 5
Hart, James V. The Novelisation Penguin 4 and 5
Hartley, L. P. The Go-Between Heinemann 4 and 5
Hautzig, Esther The Endless Steppe Penguin 3
Hawthorne, Nathaniel The Scarlet Letter Houghton Miffin 5
Head, Bessie Mary Heinemann 4 and 5
Hearne, John Voices Under the Window Pepal Tree 4 and 5 
Hemmingway, Ernest A Farewell to Arms
For whom the Bell Tolls
The Old Man and the Sea 
Charles Scribner’s Sons
Simon & Schuster 
Klett Ernst
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Hentoff, Nat The Day They Came to Arrest 
the Book
Dell 3 
Herriott, James All Creatures Great & Small
All Things Bright and 
Beautiful
All Things Wise and 
Wonderful
Every Living Thing
The Lord God Made Them All
St. Martin’s
Bantam 
St. Martin’s 
St. Martin’s 
St. Martin’s 
4 and 5
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Higgins, Jack The Eagle has Landed Penguin 4 and 5
Hines, Barry A Kestrel for a Knave Penguin 4 and 5
Hinton, S. E. The Outsiders
That Was Then, This Is Now
Lions Tracks
Turtleback
3,4 and 5 
4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 36
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Hodge, Merle Crick Crack Monkey 
For The Life of Laetitia
Heinemann
Farrar Straus and Giroux
3 
3, 4 and 5 
Holman, Felice Slake’s Limbo Aladdin Paperbacks 5 
Holme, Anne I am David Harcourt Children’s 
Books
1 
Hughes, Richard A High Wind In Jamaica Penguin 3
Huxley, Aldous Brave New World Klett Ernst 5
Imoja, Nailah Pick of the Crop Heinemann 4 and 5
James, C.L.R. Minty Alley University Press of 
Mississippi
4
James, Henry The Turn of the Screw
Portrait of a Lady
Courier Dover
Galley Press
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Jerome, J. K. Three Men in a Boat Kessinger 4 and 5
Johnson, Samuel History of Rasselas, Prince of 
Abyssinia
J. Limbird 4 and 5
Jones, Evan Skylarking Longman 1 
Jones, Toeckey Go Well, Stay Well Harper & Row 4 and 5 
Kanawa, Kiri Te and 
Foreman, Michael
Land of the Long White 
Cloud
Arcade 1 
Kastner, Erich Emil and the Detectives Overlook 1 
Kaye, M. M. The Ordinary Princess Penguin 1
Keyes, Daniel Flowers for Algemon Harcourt, Brace & World 4 and 5
Khan, Ismith The Jumbie Bird I. Obolensky 4 and 5
Kincaid, Jamaica Annie John Farrar, Straus & Giroux 2, 3 and 4
Kipling, Rudyard Jungle Book
The Second Jungle Book
1st World Publishing
Kessinger 
1
2 
L’Engle, Madeline A Wrinkle in Time Collins Educational 1 and 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 37
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Lamming, George In the Castle of My Skin University of Michigan 5 
Le Guin, Ursula A Wizard of Earth Sea
City of Illusions
Left Hand of God
Very Long Way From 
Anywhere Else
DemcoMedia 
Berkley
Longman
Harcourt
New Windmills
1, 2 and 3 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
3 
Lee, Harper To Kill a Mockingbird HarperCollins 4 and 5
Lessing, Doris The Grass is Singing Heinemann 5
Lester, Julius Basketball Game
Long Journey Home
To Be a Slave
Penguin
Dial Books
Penguin
3, 4 and 5
4 
3 and 4 
Lewis, C. Day The Otterbury Incident Putnam 2 and 3
Lewis, C. S. The Chronicles of Namia:
Book I: The Lion the 
Witch and the 
Wardrobe
Book II: Prince Caspian
Book III: The Voyage of the 
Book IV: The Silver Chair
Book V: The Horse and His
Boy
Book VI: The Magician’s 
Nephew
Book VII: The Last Battle
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
HarperCollins
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Lindgren, Astrid Pippi Goes Abroad
Pippi Longstocking
Pippi in the South Seas
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
1
1 
1 
Lindsay, Joan Picnic at Hanging Rock Buccaneer 3, 4 and 5
Lingard, Joan The Guilty Party Penguin 1 and 2
Little, Jean Mama’s Going to Buy you a 
Mocking Bird
Penguin 1
Lively, Penelope A Stitch in Time Dutton 1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 38
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Lofting, Hugh
London, Jack
Doctor Doolittle
The Call of the Wild
White Fang
Tom Doherty 
Heinemann, Penguin, 
Wordsworth Publishers 
Heinemann New 
Windmills, Puffin
1 
1, 2 and 3 
2 
Lovelace, Earl The Schoolmaster
The Dragon Cant Dance
Wine of Astonishment
Heinemann
Persea 
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Lowry, Lois The Giver EMC 2 and 3
Maartens, Maretta Paper Bird Nelson 5
MacDonald, George At the Back of the North 
Wind
The Princess and the Curdie
The Princess and the Goblin
Kessinger
Kessinger
Kessinger
1
1 
1 
MacDonald, Ian The Hummingbird Tree Heinemann 4 and 5
MacKay, Claire The Minerva Programme Puffin 1
McKay, Claude Banana Bottom X Press 4
Mais, Roger Black Lightning
Brother Man
The Hills Were Joyful
Together
Heinemann
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Mankowitz, Wolf A Kid for Two Farthings ISIS 1 
Marshall, Alan I Can Jump Puddles Longman 3 
Marshall, James Vance A River Ran Out of Eden
Walkabout
Sundance
Sundance
2, 3, 4 and 5
2, 3, 4 and 5 
Marshall, Paule Reena and Other Stories
Brown Girl, Brownstones
Praise song for the Widow
Feminist
Feminist
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
4 
Matthews, P.E. State of the Heart Penguin 3
Maugham, W. S. The Razor’s Edge Vintage 4 and 5
McCormick, Patricia Sold Hyperion 3 and 4
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 39
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
McCutcheon, Elsie The Storm Bird Farrar, Straus, Giroux 4 and 5 
Meniru, Teresa Uzo Evans 3 
Milne, A. A. Winnie the Pooh Puffin 1 
Mittelholzer, Edgar Corentyne Thunder
My Bones and My Flute 
Heinemann
Longman
4 and 5 
4 
Monk Kidd, Sue The Secret Life of Bees Viking 2, 3 and 4 
Montgomery, L.M. Anne of Avonlea
Anne of Green Gables
Anne’s House of Dreams
Anne of Ingleside
Anne of the Island
Anne of Windy Willows
Courier Dover
1st World Publishing
Haynes Barton
Bantam 
Hayes Barton
Puffin
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Moore, Brian Lives of Silence Longman 4 and 5
Morrison, Toni Song of Solomon Vintage 5
Morrow, H. L. The Splendid Journey Harcourt Education 2 and 3
Munonye, John The Only Son Heinemann 3 
Naipaul, Shiva The Chip-Chip Gatherers Vintage 4 and 5 
Naipaul, V.S. A House for Mr. Biswas
Miguel Street
The Mimic Men
They Mystic Masseur 
The Suffrage of Elvira
Penguin
Heinemann
Deutsch 
Vintage 
Penguin
5 
3 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Narayan, R. K. The Guide
Man-Eater of Malgudi
Viking 
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Nash, Ogden Custard and Company Little Brown & Co. 2
Nesbit, E. The Complete Adventures of 
the Treasure Seekers
The Enchanted Castle
Five Children and It
The House of Arden
The Last of the Dragons and 
some Others
The Magic World
Puffin
Echo Library
Courier Dover
New York Review
Penguin
Penguin
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 40
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Nesbit, E. New Treasure Seekers
The Phoenix and the Carpet
The Railway Children
The Story of the Treasure
Seekers
The Wouldbegoods
Penguin
Kessinger
Courier Dover
Biblio Bazaar 
Kessinger
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Ngugi, James The River Between
Weep Not, Child
Heinemann
Heinemann
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Nicholls, Millis A Father for Christmas Nelson Caribbean 1
Norton, André Crystal Gryphon
Iron Cage
Atheneum 
Penguin 
1
1 and 2 
Norton, Mary The Borrowers
The Borrowers Afield
Borrowers Afloat
The Borrowers Avenged
Thorndike Press
Harcourt
Harcourt
Harcourt 
1
2 
2 
2 
Nwapa, Flora Efuru Heinemann 4 and 5
O’Brien, Robert Mrs Frisby and the Rats of 
Nimh
Z for Zachariah
Aladdin 
Simon Pulse 
4 and 5
4 and 5 
O’Dell, Scott Island of the Blue Dolphin
My Name is No Angelica
Streams to the River, River to 
Sea
HMco Children’s Books
HMco Children’s Books
Fawcett Juniper
3 and 4 
3 
3 
O’Hara, Mary My Friend, Flicka HarperCollins 1 
Okoro, Nathaniel The Twin Detectives Evans Bros 4 and 5 
Orwell, George Animal Farm Random House 4 and 5
Palmer, C. Everard A Cow Called Boy
Baba and Mr Big
Big Doc Bitterroot
My Father Sun Sun Johnson
The Cloud with the Silver 
Lining
The Hummingbird People
The Sun Salutes You
The Wooing of Beppo Tate
Macmillan
Collins 
Macmillan
Deutsch 
Macmillan
Deutsch 
Bobbs Merrill
Nelson Thornes
1
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 41
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Parris, Terry Jason Whyte Oxford University Press 1 
Paton, Alan Cry, The Beloved Country Spark 4 and 5 
Patterson, Orlando The Children of Sisyphus Bolivar 5 
Pausewang, Gudrun Fall-Out Viking 2, 3, 4 and 5 
Pearce, Phillipa A Dog So Small
Downhill All the Way
Who, Sir? Me, Sir?
Chivers North America
Oxford University Press
Oxford University Press
1 
2 
2 
Phillips, Marlene Nourbese Harriet's Daughter Heinemann 4 and 5
Poe, Edgar Allan Tales of Mystery and Terror Penguin 4 and 5
Pollard, Velma Homestretch Longman, Caribbean 3, 4 and 5
Ramsay, Paulette Aunt Jen Heinemann 4 and 5
Ransome, Arthur Swallows & Amazons David R. Godine 2
Redmond, Diane The Comic Strip Odyssey Penguin 1
Reid, V.S. Peter of Mount Ephraim
Sixty Five
The Leopard 
The Young Warriors
Jamaica Publishing House
Longman 
Viking 
Longman
2 
2 
4 
1 
Rhue, Morton The Wave Delacorte 4 
Rhys, Jean Wide Sargasso Sea W.W. Norton 4 and 5 
Rowling, J.K. The Harry Potter Series Scholastic Trade 1 through 5
Salinger, J.D. The Catcher in the Rye Little, Brown 4 and 5
Salkey, Andrew A Quality of Violence Hutchinson 5
Schaefer, Jack Shane HMco Children’s Books 2, 3, 4 and 5
Scott, Paul Staying On Avon 4 and 5
Selormey, Francis The Narrow Path Praeger 3, 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 42
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Selvon, Samuel A Brighter Sun
The Lonely Londoners
Ways of Sunlight
Longman 
Penguin 
Longman Kenya 
3 and 4 
4 and 5 
3 and 4 
Serrailler, Ian The Clashing Rocks
The Enchanted Island
The Road to Canterbury
The Silver Sword
The Way of Danger
Walck
Oxford University Press
Kestrel
Heinemann New 
Windmills
Oxford University Press
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Sewell, Anna Black Beauty Pearson Prentice Hall 1 and 2
Shelley, Mary Frankenstein Courier Dover 4 and 5
Sherlock, Philip M. The Iguana’s Tail
Three Finger Jack’s Treasure
Nelson 
St. Martin’s Press
1
1 
Shute, Nevil No Highway
Silver Sword
House of Stratus
Heinemann New
2 and 3
2 
Smith, Dodie The Hundred and One 
Dalmations
Viking 1 
Smith, Wilbur Elephant Song Random House 4 and 5 
Smucker, Barbara Underground to Canada Clarke, Irwin 1 
Spark, M. The Prime of Ms Jean
Brodie
Penguin 4 and 5 
Sparks, Beatrice It Happened to Nancy: A True 
Story from the Diary of a 
Teenager
Bt. Bound 3, 4 and 5 
Sperry, Armstrong The Boy Who Was Afraid Heinemann 1
St. Omer, Garth Lights on the Hill Heinemann 4 and 5
St. Rose, Marlene Into the Mosaic Athen 1, 2 and 3 
Steinbeck, John Cannery Row
Of Mice and Men 
The Red Pony
The Grapes of Wrath 
The Pearl
Penguin
Penguin
Penguin
Modern Library
Bantam
4 and 5
4 and 5 
3 
4 and 5 
3
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 43
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Stevenson, R. L. Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
Kidnapped (Abridged) 
Treasure Island
Bantam 
Signet Classic
Oxford University Press 
2 
2 
1 and 2 
Stoker, Bram Dracula Signet Classic 4 and 5 
Storr, Catherine The Boy and the Swan Deutsch 2 
Stowe, Harriet Beecher Uncle Tom’s Cabin Prentice 3 and 4
Stratton, Allan Chanda’s Secrets Longman 4 and 5
Streatfield, Noel Ballet Shoes Random House 1
Stuart, Morna Marassa and Midnight Heinemann 1, 2 and 3
Sutcliff, Rosemary Dawn Wind
The Mark of the Horse Lord
Three Legions
Oxford University Press
Front 
Oxford University Press
2 and 3 
2 and 3 
2 
Swarthout, Glendon Bless the Beasts and Children Doublday 3
Swift, Jonathan Gulliver’s Travels
(Abridged)
Nelsons 3 
Taylor, Mildred Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry Puffin 2 and 3 
Taylor, Theodore The Cay
Timothy of the Cay
Laurel Leaf
Harcourt
1 and 2 
1 and 2 
Temple, Francis The Ramsay Scallop Harper Trophy 3,4 and 5 
Theroux, Paul A Christmas Card Puffin 1
Tolkien, J. R. R. The Hobbit Houghton Mifflin 3
Twain, Mark The Prince and the Pauper
The Adventures of 
Huckleberry Finn
Penguin
Dent, Heinemann, 
Longman, Penguin 
Heinemann, Nelson, 
Penguin
2
4 and 5 
2, 3 and 4 
Ullstein, Susan Martin Luther King
Mother Theresa
Longman
Gareth Stevens
5
5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 44
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Van Der Leoff, A. R. Avalanche
Children of the Oregon Trail
Penguin
Puffin
2 
2 
Verne, Jules Around the World in Eighty 
Days
The Mysterious Island
Puffin
Signet
2 
2 
Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea
Dodo Press 2 
Walker, Alice The Color Purple The Women’s Press 5
Warner, Rex Greeks and Trojans
Men and Gods 
Heinemann New 
Windmills
NYRB Classics
2
1 and 2 
Waugh, Evelyn A Handful of Dust Penguin 4 and 5
Webster, Jean Daddy Long Legs Penguin 2 and 3
Westall, Robert The Machine Gunners Heinemann 5
Wharton, Edith The Age of Innocence Signet 4 and 5
White, Patrick The Aunt’s Story
The Tree of Man
Trafalgar Square
Vintage
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Wiggin, K. D. Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm Penguin 4 and 5 
Wilde, Oscar The Happy Prince and Other 
Stories
The Picture of Dorian Gray
Dover 
Prestwick House Inc.
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Wilder, Laura Farmer Boy
Little House in the Big Woods
Little House on the Prairie
Harper Trophy
Harper Fastival
Harper Trophy 
1
1 
1 
Williams, Tennessee The Glass Menagerie Penguin 4 and 5
Williamson, Henry Tarka the Otter Puffin 1
Wodehouse, P.G. Lord Emsworth Acts for the 
Best
The Collected Blandings
Short Stories
Penguin
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 45
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Woodford, Pegy Misfits Heinemann New 
Windmills
3 
Wright, Richard Native Son Blooms Literary Criticism 4 and 5 
Wyndham, John The Chrysalids Penguin 4 and 5 
Wyss, J. D. The Swiss Family Robinson Signet 1 and 2 
ANTHOLOGIES OF SHORT STORIES AND/OR EXCERPTS FROM NOVELS
West Indian
Adler, Sue Mightier Than the Lipstick Penguin 5
Anthony, Michael Cricket In the Road
The Chieftain’s Carnival and 
Other Stories
Deutsch 
Longman
1
4 and 5 
Black, C. V. Tales of Old Jamaica Collins 3
Collins, Merle Rain Darling Women’s Press 4 
Ellis, Zoila On Heroes, Lizards and Passion Cubola Productions 2, 3, and 4
Faustin, Charles Under the Storyteller’s Spell: 
Folk Tales from the Caribbean
Puffin, Viking 1 
Goodison, Lorna Baby Mother and the King of 
Swords
Longman 4 
Gordimer, Nadine Some Monday for Sure Heinemann 4 and 5
Gray, Cecil Response Nelson 2 and 3
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Backfire MacMillan 2
Lovelace, Earl A Brief Conversation and 
Other Stories
Persea Books 5
Mais, Roger Listen, the Wind Longman 5
Marshall, Paule Reena and Other Stories Feminist Press 3,4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 46
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
McKenzie, Alecia Satellite City and Other 
Stories
Longman 4 and 5 
McKenzie, Earl Two Roads to Mount Joyful
A Boy Named Ossie
Longman
Heinemann
4 and 5 
2, 3 and 4 
Narinesingh, R & C Insights Nelson 3 
Porritt, Jonathon Once Upon a Planet Puffin 1
Satchwell, Deryck The Alchemy of words: An 
Anthology of Belizean Literature 
for Secondary Schools (2 volumes)
Cubola Productions 1, 2 and 3 
Senior, Olive Summer Lightning
Arrival of the Snake Woman
Longman Caribbean
Longman Caribbean
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Sherlock, Philip M. West Indies Folk Tales Oxford University Press 1
Waters, Erika J. New Writing from the 
Caribbean
MacMillan 5
Young Colville Pataki Full Cubola Productions 3 and 4
Other
Arnott, Kathleen African Myths and Legends Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Ashley, Bernard Puffin Book of School Stories Puffin 1 
Barnes & Egford Twentieth Century Short 
Stories
Nelson 4 and 5 
Barnes, D. R Short Stories of Our time Harrap 4 and 5
Callendar, Timothy It so Happen Heinemann 2
Denny, Neville Pan African Short Stories Evans, Humanities 3
Dhondy, Farrukh East End at Your Feet Nelson 5
Fisk, Nicholas The Puffin Book of Science 
Fiction Stories
Puffin 1 and 2
Forster, E.M. Collected Short Stories Readers Union 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 47
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Goodwyn, Andrew Science Fiction Stories Oxford University Press 4 
Gordimer, Nadine Crimes of Conscience. 
Selected Short Stories
Heinemann 4 and 5 
Gray, J.E.B. Indian Tales and Legends Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Hewett, R. A Choice of Poets Nelson 4 and 5 
Hunter, Jim Modern Short Stories Faber 4 and 5
Ireson, Barabara In a Class of Their Own Puffin 2 and 3
James, Joyce Dubliners Penguin, Wordsworth 
Publishers, Prestwic House
4 and 5
Kerven, Rosalind Earth Magic, Sky Magic Cambridge 3 and 4
Kipling, Rudyard Just So Stories Puffin 1
Lawrence, D.H. Love Among the Haystack and 
Other Stories
Selected Tales
Viking 5
4 and 5 
Lester, Julius Long Journey Home Puffin 4 and 5 
Martinez, Christina The Earth Needs Friends Penguin 1 and 2 
Maugham, W. Somerset The Kite and Other Stories Macmillan 2 
Phinn, Gervase The Turning Tide and Other 
Short Stories
Nelson 2 
Reeves, James Heroes and Monsters: 
Legends of Ancient Greece
Hippocrene Books 1 
Rich, Hilary and Mann, 
Ann
Frankie Mae and Other Stories Nelson 5
Rutherford & Hannah Commonwealth Short Stories Holmes and Meier 5
Smyth, W. M. Good Stories Edward Arnold 3
Taylor, Mildred D. The Friendship and Other 
Stories
Puffin 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 48
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Thomas, Dylan A Prospect of the Sea
Quite Early One Morning 
(Part 1)
Aldine
New direction Publishing
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Walker, Alice Everyday Use and Other 
Stories
Rutgers University Press 4 and 5 
Wambeu, Daniel A Girl for Sale and Other 
Stories
Evans 5 
Welch, John Stories from South Asia Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Woodford, Peggy Misfits Teens 4
SOURCES OF POEMS
West Indian
Bailey, Nahdjla Time for Poetry Nelson 5
Bennett, Paula The Penguin Book of 
Caribbean Verse in English
Penguin 5
Brathwaite, Edward The Arrivants Oxford University Press 5 
Brown, Stewart Caribbean Poetry Now Edward Arnold 5 
Foster, John Spaceways. An Anthology of 
Space Poetry
Oxford University Press 1 
Figueroa, J. F. Caribbean Voices (2 Vols.) Evans 4 
Gasztold, Carmen Bernos Prayers from the Ark Penguin 1, 2 and 3
Gray, Cecil Bite In – Stage 2
Bite In – Stage 3
Bite In 3
Nelson
Nelson
Nelson
2
3 
4 
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Out for Stars 1 MacMillan 1, 2 and 3
Irish, J. A. George There is An Isle Somewhere Caribbean Research 
Centre
5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 49
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Mansfield and Armstrong Every Man Will Shout Oxford University Press 2, 3 and 4 
McKay, Claude Selected Poems Dover 3 
Morris, Mervyn The Pond & Other Poems New Beacon Books 4 and 5 
Mordecai, P. and Walker￾Gordon, G.
Sun Song 1 Longman 2 
Nash, Ogden Custard and Company Viking 1
Nichols, Grace Poetry Jump Up Puffin Books
Phinn, Gervasse Lizard Over Ice Nelson 1, 2 and 3
Pollard, Velma Anansesem Longman 3
Ramchand & Gray West Indian Poetry Longman 3, 4 and 5
Seymour, A. J. Selected Poems Blue Parrot Press 4
Walmsley, Anne The Sun’s Eye Longman Caribbean 2 and 3
Wilson, Donald New Ships Oxford University Press 2 and 3
Other 
Belloc, Hilaire Cautionary Verses for Boys 
and Girls
Puffin 2 and 3 
Benson, Gerard This Poem Doesn’t Rhyme Puffin 2 
Bleiman, Barbara Five Modern Poets Longman 4 and 5 
Collins, V.H. A Book of Narrative Verses Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Forde, A.N. Talk of the Tamarids Hodder Murray 3
Frost, Robert Selected Poems Cliff Road Books 4 and 5
Gasztold, Carmen Bernos Prayers from the Ark Penguin 2 and 3
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Out for Stars MacMillan 2 and 3
Hewett, R. A Choice of Poets Nelson 5
Hughes, Ted Here Today Nelson Thornes Ltd. 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 50
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Magee, Wes The Puffin Book of Christmas 
Poems
Puffin 3 and 4 
Porrit, Johnathan Once Upon a Planet Puffin 2 
Rosen, Michael Culture Shock Puffin 2 
PLAYS
West Indian
Braithwaite, Edward Odale’s Choice Evans 3
Campbell, Alistaire Anansi Nelson 3, 4 and 5
Hill, Errol The Ping Pong2
Plays for Today
MacMillan
Longman
4
3, 4 and 5 
Hillary, Samuel Chippy UWI Extra Mural
Department
3 
James, C. L. R. Beyond a Boundary Random Housing U.K. 5 
Noel, Keith Carlong Caribbean Drama for 
the Classroom
Carlong Publishers 3
Redhead, Wilfred Canaree and Pot1
Hoist Your Flag1
Three Comic Sketches1
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
UWI Extra Mural 
Department 1
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
1
1 
1 
Roach, Eric Belle Fanto
Calabash of Blood
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
4 and 5
5 
Rhone, Trevor Bella’s Gate Boy
Two Can Play and Other Plays
Old Story Time
Macmillan Caribbean
Macmillan Caribbean
Longman
4 and 5
4 and 5
3, 4 and 5 
N.B.: 1Plays for classroom activity and production in the first year. 2The Ping Pong by Errol Hill is available in Carray! A collection of six plays, edited by James Lee Wah, published by MacMillan. Other plays in the collection are: Africa Sling shot by Cicely Waite-Smith; dog and Iguana by Gladys Stuart; Riding Haas by Colville Young; Goose and Gander by Wilfred Redhead and Tears in the Gayelle by Dennis Noel.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 51
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Stone, Judy Champions of the Gayelle MacMillan Caribbean 4 and 5 
Waite-Smith, Cicely Africa Sling-Shot UWI Extra Mural 
Department
2 
Walcott, Derek Malcauchon, or Six in the 
Rain
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
5 
Walcott, Roderick The Harrowing of Benjy UWI Extra Mural 
Department
2 
Other
Anouilh, Jean Antigone (French language 
edition)
French & European Pub. 4 and 5
Bolt, Robert A Man for all Seasons A & C Black 4 and 5
Brecht, Bertolt The Caucasian Chalk Circle
The Life of Galileo
University of Minnesota 
Press
Penguin
5
5 
Chapman, Robert and 
Coxe, Louise
Billy Budd Hill and Wary 4 and 5
Chekhov, Anton The Cherry Orchard Diareads.com 5
Daviot, Gordon Richard of Bordeaux Little Brown 5 
Gheon, Henri Christmas in the Market Place J. Miller Ltd. 2 
Gogol, Nikolai The Government Inspector
The Long and Short and the 
Tall 
Oberon Books 
Heinemann
4 and 5 
5 
Hansberry, Lorraine To Be Young, Gifted and 
Black
A Raisin in the Sun
Vintage, 1st Vintage Books 4 and 5
Vintage 5
Ibsen, Henrik1 Noah
An Enemy of the People
Penguin 5
Modern Library 4 and 5
Jones, Toeckey In Search of Dragon’s 
Mountain
Nelson 4 and 5
N.B.: 1Plays for classroom activity and production in the first year.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 52
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Miller, Arthur2 Death of a Salesman
The Crucible
Penguin
Heinemann, Penguin
5 
4 and 5 
NB: Isben Plays Two published by Methuen, contains both An enemy of the People and A doll’s House as well as Hedda Gabler. 2
Miller Plays published by Methuen, contains the following plays: All My sons, Death of a Salesman, The Crucible and 
A Memory of Two Mondays.
O’Casey, Sean Juno and the Paycock Players Press 4 and 5
Pomerance, Bernard The Elephant Man Grove Press 5 
Priestly, J.B. An Inspector Calls Dsmatists Play Service Inc. 5 
Rattigan, Terrence The Winslow Boy Nick Hern Books 3 
Rose, R. Twelve Angry Men Penguin 4 and 5 
Wood, E. R. The Eight Windmill Book of 
One-Act Plays
Heinemann Educational 
Publishers
2 
Schiach, Don The Wild Bunch and Other 
Plays
Nelson 3, 4, and 5 
Shakespeare, William As You Like It
Hamlet
Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan, Methuen, 
Oxford University Press, 
Penguin
4 and 5 
Julius Caesar Cambridge University 
Press, Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan Oxford 
University Press, Penguin, 
Rout, Stanley Thornes
3, 4 and 5
Macbeth Blackie, Cambridge 
University Press, Circle 
Press Publications, 
Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Hodder, 
Longman, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Oxford 
University Press, Penguin
3, 4 and 5
The Merchant of Venice Cambridge University 
Press, Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Hutchinson, 
3, 4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 53
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Longman, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Oxford 
University Press, Penguin, 
Routledge, Stanley 
Thornes
Richard III Oxford University Press, 
Penguin
4 and 5 
Romeo and Juliet Cambridge University 
Press, Collins E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan
4 and 5
Twelfth Night Cambridge, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Penguin
4 and 5
A Midsummer's Night Dream Oxford World's Clssics 3 and 4
Shaw, George Bernard Pygmalion
Saint Joan
Nu Vision Publication 4 and 5
5 
Sheridan, Richard The Rivals
The School for Scandal
Book Jungle 
Digireads.com 
4 and 5
5 
Swift, Paul No Man’s Land Nelson 4 and 5
Synge, John Riders to the Sea Dodo Press 4 and 5
Thomas, Dylan Under Milk Wood New Directions 
Publishing
4 and 5
Wesker, Arnold Chips with Everything Random House 5
Wilde, Oscar The Importance of Being 
Earnest
Prestwick House Inc. 5
Wilder, Thornton Our Town Harper Perennial Modern 
Classics
4 and 5 
Williams, Tennessee Glass Menagerie
A Streetcar Named Desire
New Directions 
Publishing
New Directions 
Publishing
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 54
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
SOURCES OF IDEAS FOR DRAMA ACTIVITIES
Adland, D. E. Group Drama (Books 1-4) Longman 1 
Allington, A. Drama and Education Blackwell 1 
Chilver, Peter Improvised Drama Batsford 1
Kissoon, Freddie 101 Creative Exercises in 
Drama 
Space Printers 1
Nuttall, Kenneth Let’s Act (Book 1-4) Longman 1
Slade, Peter Child Drama University of London Press 1
Way, Brian Development Through Drama Humanity Books 1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 55
♦ GLOSSARY OF KEY WORDS USED IN THE ENGLISH 
A AND B EXAMINATIONS
WORD TASK
Compare Examine the similarities as well as differences to reach a general 
conclusion. 
For example: Compare the ways in which the two parents in the poems 
“Ana” and “Little Boy Crying” demonstrate their love for the children.
Compare and Contrast Examine the similarities as well as differences to reach a general 
conclusion. 
For example: Compare the ways in which the two parents in “Ana” and 
“Little Boy Crying” demonstrate their love for the children.
It must be noted that the word “compare” used by itself takes into 
consideration both similarities and differences. However, the word 
contrast used by itself indicates that only the differences must be 
provided.
For example: Discuss TWO ways in which Lady Macduff is contrasted 
with Lady Macbeth.
Comment Examine how the writer uses different elements (for example, literary 
device, stage props) to create effect and meaning. The overall effect on 
the piece of work must also be provided. The effect must take into 
account the writers purpose, and other elements of the piece of work, for 
example, theme, structure, diction and tone.
For example: Comment on the shifts of mood in the scene in which 
Lady Macduff appears. 
Describe Provide a detailed account, including significant characteristics or traits of 
the issue in question.
For example: Describe Macbeth’s conflicting thoughts and feelings as he 
contemplates the murder.
Discuss Provide an extended answer exploring related concepts and issues using 
detailed examples but not necessarily drawing a conclusion.
For example: Discuss the importance of Katherina’s final speech in The 
Taming of the Shrew
Explain Focus on what, how and why something occurred. State the reasons or 
justifications, interpretation of results and causes. 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 56
WORD TASK
For example: Explain the dramatic significance of this scene.
Identify Extract the relevant information from the stimulus without explanation. 
For example: Identify TWO phrases in the last four lines that create the 
atmosphere of abandonment.
In English B Paper 02 questions can also ask for an explanation.
For example: Identify and explain TWO ways in which Shakespeare later 
impresses upon his audience what a horrible crime it is to kill a king.
Illustrate Provide examples to demonstrate or prove the subject of the question.
For example: Identify the character traits that can be seen in Amanda 
from the beginning of the play to this point. Illustrate EACH of the 
character traits you have identified.
List Itemise the requested information. Details are not required.
For example: List the main points of the opening speech.
Outline Show or trace the development of something from the point of origin to 
that specified in the question.
For example: Briefly outline what happens in the poems “Richard Cory” 
and “God’s Work”.
State Provide short concise answer without explanation.
For example: State TWO factors which the fitness proponents 
recommend that society should emphasise more.
Summarise Present the main points, ideas or concepts in your own words as far as 
possible.
For example: Summarise the MAJOR factors which contribute to the 
disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market.
Western Zone Office 20 February 2009
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 57
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
EXAMINATION
SPECIMEN
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
FOR
ENGLISH A
READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
Each item in this test has four suggested answers lettered (A), (B), (C), (D). Read each item you are
about to answer and decide which choice is best. On your answer sheet find the number which
corresponds to your item and shade the space having the same letter as the answer you have choosen.
Look at the sample item below.
Sample Item
Choose the word that BEST completes the sentence and shade the appropriate space on the answer
sheet.
All the occupants were _______ from the building before the firemen arrived.
Sample Answer
(A) released
(B) protected A B C D
(C) evacuated
(D) extinguished
The best answer to this item is “evacuated”, so answer space (C) has been shaded.
Copyright © 2008 Caribbean Examinations Council.
All rights reserved.
01218010/SPEC 2009
®
- 2 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 1 - 5
Directions: Each sentence in this section has EITHER one OR two words missing. Choose from
the four suggested answers the word or pair of words which BEST completes the meaning of the
sentence.
1. His dismissal from the job is ______ since
he persists in arriving late.
(A) inevitable
(B) inexcusable
(C) informative
(D) inconceivable
2. The Minister pointed out that ______ building
developments along the river and ______
dumping of refuse into the watercourses
continue to be a problem to his ministry.
(A) illegal ... discriminate
(B) enormous ... poisonous
(C) unauthorised .... judicious
(D) unauthorised ... indiscriminate
3. Clinging to one of her relatives, the bereaved
mother tried to maintain her ______.
(A) grief
(B) status
(C) composure
(D) innocence
4. The investors expected a rate of return which
seemed _______ high in light of current
unfavourable economic conditions.
(A) favourable
(B) adequately
(C) unreasonably
(D) optimistically
5. The psychologist said that it was time that a
course on self respect was made ______ in
all secondary schools.
(A) legal
(B) optimal
(C) universal
(D) mandatory
- 3 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 6 - 10
Directions:
Each sentence in this section has ONE underlined word. Choose from the four suggested answers
the word which is nearly OPPOSITE in meaning to the underlined word.
6. Roger, who had consistently studied for the
whole year, was optimistic about his chances
in the examination.
(A) doubtful
(B) confident
(C) outspoken
(D) unconcerned
7. After the story was published in the
newspaper his colleagues ostracized him.
(A) accepted
(B) discussed
(C) understood
(D) recognised
8. The government’s new health plan was
greeted with enthusiasm.
(A) anxiety
(B) amazement
(C) indifference
(D) disappointment
9. There was a recent newsflash which said that
the state of emergency had been rescinded.
(A) revised
(B) effected
(C) renewed
(D) approved
10. Perhaps he would be more popular if he were
not so reticent.
(A) frank
(B) clever
(C) laughable
(D) talkative
- 4 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 11 - 15
Directions:
Choose from suggested answers A, B, C or D the one that BEST describes EACH of the sentences
11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.
(A) The sentence is too wordy, that is, repetitive or contains redundancies.
(B) The sentence contains clichés or misused metaphors.
(C) The sentence is incorrect grammatically or faulty in diction.
(D) The sentence is acceptable as it stands.
11. The Chernobyl accident gave a grim but
timely reminder to that no nation can hope to
isolate itself from the horrendous effects of
a major nuclear disaster.
12. Is it any wonder why the children that Miss
Brown knows behave like delinquents when
they have a heroine that thinks the worst of
them and their kind?
13. The publishers, flushed with the success of
their most recent anthology of Caribbean
poetry, launched out eagerly into the field of
short stories, hoping to reach even greater
heights.
14. The sighting of Halley’s Comet, a most unique
phenomenon, made 1986 a memorable year
in the annals of the twentieth century.
15. The little boys enjoyed playing in the yard of
the uninhabited house where no one had lived
for many years.
- 5 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 16 - 20
Directions: Some of the following sentences are unacceptable because of inappropriate grammar,
idiom or vocabulary. Some sentences are acceptable as they stand. No sentence contains more than
one inappropriate element.
Choose the one underlined part of the sentence that you feel is inappropriate by selecting the
appropriate letter. If the sentence is acceptable as it stands, choose D.
16. While driving through the ranch on a conducted tour the farmers were appall to see several diseased
 A B C
cattle. No error
 D
17. The soundness of the proposal introduced by the opposition members was quite evident though the
 A B
presentation was both criticised by the President and the Secretary of State. No error
 C D
18. We always feelgood whenever our cricketers playwell enough to win a series of matches convincingly.
 A B C
No error
 D
19. The two robbers, not knowing the value of the loot, were unable to agree on how to divide it among
 A B C
themselves. No error
D
20. One must be aware of threats to your health if happy living is one’s goal. No error
 A B C D
- 6 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 21 – 28
Directions: Read the following poem carefully and then answer items 21 - 28 on the basis of what is
stated or implied.
 Trane
Propped against the crowded bar
he pours into the curved and silver horn
his old unhappy longing for a home
the dancers twist and turn
5 he leans and wishes he could burn
his memories to ashes like some old notorious emperor
of Rome, but no stars blazed across the sky when he was born
no wise men found his hovel, this crowded bar
where dancers twist and turn
10 holds all the fame and recognition he will ever earn
on earth or heaven, he leans against the bar
and pours his old unhappy longing in the saxophone.
Edward Kamau Brathwaite
21. The “silver horn” in line 2 refers to
(A) a wine goblet
(B) an ice bucket
(C) a large vase
(D) a musical instrument
22. Where does the action in lines 1 – 3 take
place?
(A) In a hotel
(B) In a night club
(C) In a music hall
(D) In a living room
23. Lines 2 – 3 is an example of a
(A) personification
(B) simile
(C) hyperbole
(D) metaphor
24. In line 3, “his old unhappy longing for a home”
suggests that the character
(A) did not like music
(B) believed he had little talent
(C) was unhappy because he had no
house
(D) was longing for success and
recognition on a wide scale
- 7 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
25. Line 7 “...but no stars blazed across the sky
when he was born” suggests that
(A) he was born on a dark night
(B) no one was aware of his birth
(C) he was not born to famous parents
(D) his birth lacked great significance
26. The word “hovel” in line 8 refers to
(A) a hotel
(B) a cradle
(C) a poor home
(D) an animal’s pen
27. The poet refers to the birth of Christ in lines
(A) 1 – 2
(B) 5 – 6
(C) 7 – 8
(D) 10 – 11
28. Which of the following words BEST describes
the mood of the character in the poem?
(A) Anger
(B) Nostalgia
(C) Optimism
(D) Melancholy
- 8 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
10
15
20
25
Items 29 - 36
Directions: Read the following passage carefully and then answer items 29 - 36 on the basis of what
is stated or implied.
Nazruddin was an exotic, but he remained bound
to our community because he needed husbands
and wives for his children. I always knew that
in me he saw the prospective husband of one
of his daughters; but I had lived with this knowl￾edge for so long that it didn’t embarrass me. I
liked Nazruddin. I welcomed his visits, his talks,
his very alienness as he sat downstairs in our
drawing room or verandah and spoke of the
excitements of his far-off world.
He was a man of enthusiasms. He relished
everything he did. He liked the houses he bought
(always bargains), the restaurants he chose, the
dishes he had ordered. Everything worked out
well for him, and his tales of unfailing luck would
have made him intolerable if he didn’t have the
gift of describing things so well. He made me
long to do what he had done, to be where he
had been. In some ways he became my model.
He was something of a palmist, in addition to
everything else, and his readings were valued
because he could do them only when the mood
took him. When I was ten or twelve he had
given me a reading and had seen great things in
my hand. So I respected his judgement. He
added to that reading from time to time. I re￾member one occasion especially. He looked at
my palm then said, “You are the most faithful
man I know.” This didn’t please me; it seemed
to me he was offering me no life at all. I said,
“Can you read your own hand? Do you know
what’s in store for you?” He said, “Don’t I
know, don’t I know.”
The tone of his voice was different then, and I
saw that this man, for whom (according to his
talk) everything worked out beautifully, really
lived with a vision of things turning out badly. I
thought: This is how a man should behave; and
I felt close to him after that, closer than I did to
members of my own family.
 5
Then came the crash which some people had
been quietly prophesying for this successful
and talkative man. Nazruddin’s adopted
country became independent, quite suddenly,
and the news from that place for weeks and
months was of wars and killings. From the
way some people talked you might have be￾lieved that if Nazruddin had been another kind
of person, if he had boasted less of his suc￾cess, drunk less wine and been more seemly
in his behaviour, events would have taken an￾other turn. We heard that he had fled with
his family to Uganda. In due course he came
to the coast. People looking for a broken man
were disappointed. Nazruddin was as
sprightly as ever, still with his dark glasses
and suit. The disaster appeared not to have
touched him at all.
30
35
40
29. The reference to Nazruddin as “an exotic”
(line 1) indicates that he is
(A) boring
(B) snobbish
(C) scheming
(D) eccentric
30. “He relished everything he did” (lines 11 - 12)
suggests that Nazruddin
(A) enjoyed all his activities
(B) was an expert on everything
(C) succeeded at whatever he tried
(D) was proud of his accomplishments
45
50
55
- 9 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
31. The writer’s reaction to Nazruddin’s
comment, “You are the most faithful man I
know” (lines 28 - 29), indicates that the writer
(A) did not like faithful men
(B) had himself been unfaithful
(C) thought that faithful men led uninter￾esting lives
(D) felt that faithful men had short
life-spans
32. The answer “Don’t I know, don’t I know”
(lines 32 - 33), indicates to the writer that
Nazruddin
(A) did not really know much about
palmistry
(B) foresaw the possibility of
unfavourable events for himself
(C) was not being truthful about his
experiences
(D) did not know what the future held in
store for him
33. According to the extract which of the
following factors caused some people to
prophesy ill luck for Nazruddin?
 I. He was too boastful.
 II. He drank too much.
III. His behaviour was unacceptable.
(A) I and II only
(B) I and III only
(C) II and III only
(D) I, II and III
34. According to the extract, ONE of the reasons
the writer liked Nazruddin was that he
(A) inspired the writer to pattern himself
after him
(B) was a respected palmist in the com￾munity in which he lived
(C) considered the writer a prospective
husband for one of his daughters
(D) described interestingly to the writer
the secrets of his worldly successes
35. According to the extract, Nazruddin left the
country in which he was living because
(A) the new leaders were dissatisfied
with his behaviour and drove him
out
(B) his business there suffered financial
ruin
(C) there was violence in the country
(D) he could no longer find suitable
husbands and wives there for his
children
36. The impression given of Nazruddin in the
extract is that he
(A) was a coward
(B) was not easily daunted
(C) genuinely loved his family
(D) did not care about the community
- 10 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 37- 44
Directions: Read the following extract carefully and then answer items 37 - 44 on the basis of what
is stated or implied.
5
10
15
20
25
Every November the roads to Pushkar, a sleepy little town in western India, become clogged with
buses, bullock carts and camels bringing people to the Pushkar camel fair. Hundreds of camel herders
along with the thousands who are already there camped outside on the reddish rust sand dunes from afar
look like the mounds of paprika in a spice shop. Here, for two weeks before the full moon, camels are
bought, bartered and sold.
The Raikas, independent and hospitable people, are descended from a tribe that migrated to Asia
from Germany centuries ago. According to their mythology, however, Siva, a god of the Hindu trinity,
created the first camel. Siva had four daughters, and each married a Rajput (or King) of the highest caste.
Their children became camel herders, grew tall, thin yet strong, with high cheekbones and oval faces.
These mythic forebears of the Raikas could live for days solely on camel milk.
The Raikas are known by many names: raberai, or “guide”, by those who respect them; and bhool,
or “ghost”, by others, perhaps jealous of their freedom. It is easy to understand how the Raikas got this
last name, as they can appear suddenly and mysteriously on the horizon with a single camel, or even a
magnificent herd of a hundred. The focal point of the Raika culture is the camel; it is reflected in their
language, their religion and their mobility. They have 400 synonyms for camel, and refer to their favourite
camels with affectionate names like “Raieao”, which means brown. Herders grow up learning 15 calls to
their camels.
The Raika man wears simple attire: a white tunic top and dhoti, a cloth wrapped around his waist
and pulled up between his legs, Gandhi-style. He may toss a worn blanket elegantly over one shoulder,
creating style with simple dignity and poise. The Raikas’ world of brown sands and brown camels is
gloriously brightened with garments the shades of amber, rose and orange. Every morning, young men
deftly wrap scarlet turbans, 3 yards long and a yard wide, around their heads for protection against the
desert’s day-time heat and bitter night-time cold. At sundown, the sun’s sinking light seems to make the
turbans glow. Night or day, the business at hand is camels. Everything else - the dentist with his suitcase
of instruments and false teeth, the barber ready to give a quick shave on the sands, the bhopa or musician
playing ballads about the camel god Pabu, the stalls with sweets - is a distraction. Here the visitor can
learn anything and everything about camels.
37. The writer mentions the congestion on the
roads to Pushkar in order to
(A) show the popularity of the camel fair
(B) comment on the poor state of the
roads
(C) prove that Pushkar is not a sleepy
town
(D) suggest that traffic jams can be
found everywhere
38. According to the passage, how long does the
camel fair last?
(A) Ten days
(B) Two weeks
(C) Until the full moon
(D) Until all the camels are sold
- 11 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
39. Which of the following does mythology as￾cribe to the Raikas?
(A) They can exist solely on camel’s milk.
(B) They migrated to Germany centuries
ago.
(C) They are the descendants of a Hindu
god.
(D) They became camel herders at the
suggestion of Parvati.
40. The word “hospitable” (line 6) is CLOSEST
in meaning to
(A) proud
(B) happy
(C) ancient
(D) friendly
41. The writer suggests that “bhool” could be an
appropriate name for the Raikas because
(A) many Raikas are jealous of their free-
 dom
(B) they belong to a tribe that is practi-
 cally extinct
(C) they can surprise people by their sud-
 den appearance
(D) many people are afraid of them
42. The writer mentions that the Raikas have “400
synonyms for camel” (line 15) and that
herders “grow up learning 15 calls to their
camels” (lines 16 - 17) to show
(A) their superiority in comparison to
their herders
(B) that the Raikas know everything
about camels
(C) that the Raikas are careless about
names
(D) how important the camels are to the
Raikas
43. As a means of protection against desert tem￾peratures, the Raikas
(A) wrap long turbans around their heads
(B) wear white tunic tops and dhotis
(C) brighten their garments with coloured
 materials
(D) are never without blankets around
 their shoulders
44. In the extract, which of the following is NOT
stated about the Raikas?
(A) They are friendly.
(B) They dress simply.
(C) They are respectful.
(D) They enjoy freedom.
- 12 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 45 - 52
Directions: Read the following advertisement carefully and then answer items 45 - 52 on the basis
of what is stated or implied.
GIVE YOUR CHILD THE CHILDREN’S ASPIRIN MORE DOCTORS
RECOMMEND THAN ANY OTHER. It tastes better. Its pure, natural (not artificial)
orange flavour and creamy smoothness make it more pleasant for children.
It’s the highest quality. Scientifically tested ingredients and 224 quality-control
checks ensure maximum reliability.
In a national survey it was picked 4 to 1 by children’s doctors who recommended
an individual brand. Of course, little boys and girls prefer the genuine orange flavour of
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
But even more important to you, as a mother, is the reliable purity of this
aspirin itself. It takes 224 careful product-control checks to ensure the highest quality. But it’s
worth it. Because that’s what makes
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
the preferred way to relieve the big fevers, little aches, the distress children suffer when
they come down with colds. Doctorsknow about the highest quality of this aspirin. That’s why,
in a survey covering practically all of the children’s doctors in the nation,
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
was specified 4 to 1 among those who recommended a brand.
But one thing the majority of children’s doctors do not favour is the addition of
other ingredients (such as bufferin) to children’s aspirin. So always give your children pure
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN. 5
10
15
20
45. One of the claims made by the passage is
that St. Michael aspirin
(A) is the only children’s aspirin
(B) works faster than other brands
(C) tastes better than other aspirins
(D) is used by mothers all over the world
46. From the passage it can be inferred that
doctors recommend St. Michael aspirin
because
(A) children like it
(B) it is easy to obtain
(C) its quality is excellent
(D) it is the cheapest brand
- 13 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
47. The passage is directed specifically to
(A) children
(B) mothers
(C) doctors
(D) druggists
48. The words ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR
CHILDREN (line 8) are printed in block
capitals to
(A) give a neat appearance
(B) introduce a new product
(C) capture the attention of the reader
(D) prove reliability through quality
control
49. The author mentions the number of quality
checks on St. Michael aspirin to tell the reader
that
(A) it relieves all children’s diseases
(B) no artificial ingredients are added
(C) it has been recommended by many
doctors
(D) the product is safe and superior to
others
50. Which of the following was a result of the
survey mentioned in line 6?
(A) It was decided not to add bufferin to
children’s aspirin.
(B) It was decided that aspirin should be
flavoured with orange.
(C) The most popular brand of children’s
aspirin among doctors was St.
Michael.
(D) Mothers were assured of the purity
of the product.
51. Which of the following types of writing does
the writer employ in this advertisement?
(A) Expository
(B) Narrative
(C) Descriptive
(D) Persuasive
52. The MOST suitable title for this advertisement
is
(A) ASPIRIN: The Children’s Friend
(B) ASPIRIN: The Cure for All
(C) DRUGS For Children
(D) Mother’s Help!
- 14 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 53 – 60
Directions: Read the following extract carefully and then answer items 53 - 60 on the basis of what is
stated or implied.
53. The slogan “Welcome to The Foothills”
suggests that the advertisement is directed
to
(A) persons from the lower income
group
(B) all visitors to the property
(C) only persons seeking to own property
at “The Foothills”
(D) middle and upper income groups
54. Which of the following BEST describes “The
Foothills”?
(A) A vacation home
(B) An all inclusive facility
(C) A gated housing development
(D) A retirement housing development
Caribbean Beat, Media and Editorial Projects Ltd.,
July 2006, p.12.
55. The size of the lots shown on the
advertisement range from
(A) 1,000 to 9,000 square feet
(B) 6,000 to 8,000 square feet
(C) 7,000 to 8,000 square feet
(D) 6,000 to 9,000 square feet
56. What information is given to help persons find
out more about “The Foothills”?
(A) E-mail address only
(B) E-mail address and telephone number
(C) E-mail address, fax number and
website
(D) E-mail, website and telephone
numbers
57. If Mr Glen Selman purchased lot number 2,
he will be CLOSEST to which of the
following sporting facilities?
(A) Pool hall
(B) Golf course
(C) Jogging track
(D) Swimming pool
58. Which of the following BEST explains the
presence of the security booths on the
property?
(A) There is much crime in the area.
(B) Access to the property is restricted.
(C) The owners want to keep visitors out.
(D) The property owners require
protection.
59. The information given in “conveniently located
seven minutes from Trincity mall and easy
access to the airport, golf course and schools”
suggests that the property is
(A) close to everything
(B) located seven minutes away from
everything
(C) the most important place in the
community
(D) ideally located in relation to
significant places
60. Which of the following can be included to
make “The Foothills” even more attractive
to potential buyers?
(A) A taxi service
(B) A supermarket
(C) Banking services
(D) A secondary school
- 15 -
01218010/SPEC 2009
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS TEST.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
EXAMINATION 
ENGLISH A 
SPECIMEN PAPER 
Paper 02 – General Proficiency 
2 hours 40 minutes
READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
1. Section A consists of ONE question. You MUST answer this question.
2. Section B consists of TWO questions. You MUST answer both questions from 
this section.
3. Section C consists of THREE questions. You MUST answer ONE question 
from this section.
4. Section D consists of TWO questions. You MUST answer ONE question from 
this section.
5. You are advised to take some time to read through the paper and plan your 
answers.
DO NOT TURN THIS PAGE UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO.
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council.
All rights reserved.
01218020/SPEC 2012
FORM 01218020/SPEC 2012
 TEST CODE 01218020
- 2 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION A 
(Suggested time: 35 minutes)
Answer Question 1.
1. Read the following newspaper article on brain health carefully and then write a 
summary of it in NOT MORE THAN 120 words. If this limit is exceeded, only 
the first 120 words of your answer will be read and assessed. As far as possible, 
use your OWN words. Your summary must be in continuous prose.
You may use the answer booklet to jot down a plan of your points or make notes. 
THIS WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on how well you
(a) were able to identify the main ideas and opinions in the extract
(b) organized and expressed these ideas
(c) used appropriate grammar, sentence structure, vocabulary, spelling and 
punctuation. 
 
 
People generally take the brain and its functions for granted, especially in the 
first forty years of life. Even though the brain is considered to be one of the most 
important organs in the human body, we don’t pay much attention to keeping it fit and 
healthy. This is an understandable situation since life usually forces us to be active on 
many levels in our younger years, but we need to pay more careful attention to brain 
health, especially in light of the demands of modern life. Generally, when people think 
about staying fit, they only focus from the neck down. However, the health of your 
body should also include your brain. A healthy brain plays a critical role in almost 
everything you do: thinking, feeling, remembering, working, playing, and even 
sleeping. Improving your brain health can protect you from dementia, increase your 
memory and sharpen your concentration.
There is much that can be done to keep the brain healthy at any age. Lists 
widely offered include simple, and even funny things, like brushing your teeth with the 
unfamiliar hand, or showering in the dark, walking and gardening, all of which are low, 
or free of cost. Recommended routines include physical activity, which increases the 
flow of blood to the brain; maintaining social contacts and having intelligent 
conversations; sleeping well. On the other hand there is a list of things to avoid. 
Examples from that list include that you should be careful not to drink to excess, you 
should not ignore any changes in your physical or mental health, try not to be isolated 
in your home, and certainly do not entertain the idea that you are too old to take up 
something new. The most outstanding of all the recommendations is physical activity.
Physical activity is one of the best ways to promote the growth of new brain 
cells and keep the brain healthy. Exercise increases levels of brain chemicals that 
encourage the growth of nerve cells and this explains to some extent why aerobic 
activity enhances memory skills, and why moderately strenuous activity is strongly 
associated with successful brain aging. An interesting form of physical activity is 
- 3 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
dance. Learning a dance can nourish brain cells, which translates to cognitive skills in 
the real world, and dancing requires twists and turns that strengthen the brain 
connections.
There is always the caution attached, that you use common sense when 
increasing physical activity. Extra care is necessary when you have not exercised for a 
long time, and it is very important to consult with your doctor or health care provider 
before starting an exercise programme or increasing your activity.
“Keeping Your Brain Healthy” The Barbados Advocate, 
October 4, 2009, p. 26.
Total 30 marks
- 4 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION B
(Suggested time: 40 minutes)
Answer Questions 2 and 3.
2. Read the passage below carefully and then answer all the questions that follow.
 “My turn now,” said Bobby, and the others ran to hide as he started to count. 
Celia was hunting for a good hiding-place among the trees near to the fence when she 
heard a low hiss. She looked keenly, but though her eyes were used to the darkness, 
she could see no one. The hiss came again – surely from very near? 
 Celia turned this way and that, trying to see with her whole body, to pierce the 
darkness. As the sound came again, she rushed straight towards it and then gasped in 
surprise as she felt flesh against her face and outstretched hands.
 Then she realized what the scamps had been doing. Dingo and Jiggs had taken 
off their shirts. In the moonless dark of the night, their brown skins would make 
them invisible. Their pants, being a dull khaki, were quite safe from detection. She 
wanted to laugh out, but Bobby would be sure to hear. In fact he was already coming 
in their direction. Celia was hastily pushed behind Jiggs and cautioned to stay 
absolutely still. As Bobby approached, it gave her a strange feeling to know that he 
was looking straight at them and could not see them. She felt as though she really 
was invisible, as if she needed his seeing to make her really exist. She felt light, 
insubstantial, a ghost. Bobby came to within a few feet of them, then wandered off, 
still searching earnestly.
And so time passed – days of schoolwork and afternoons of play. Mrs. Wilson 
had great trouble trying to get the children to settle down to serious homework during 
the evenings. Dingo and Jiggs hated any form of regimentation and could not see 
why they should do more work at home than they did at school. This of course made 
Celia reluctant to do her work too. One day matters came to a head.
Adapted from Joy Moore, “The Cousins” Backfire: 
A Collection of Caribbean Short Stories, 
Macmillan Education, 1973, p. 99.
 (a) What game were the children playing? (1 mark )
 (b) Why did the boys remove their shirts while playing? (2 marks)
 (c) What did the boys do (lines 8 - 17) to make Celia call them “scamps”?
 (2 marks)
 (d) Identify TWO phrases, one in paragraph 1 and one in paragraph 3 which 
indicate that the children took the game seriously. (2 marks)
 (e) Quote the evidence from paragraph 3 that suggests that Celia was 
uncomfortable with not being seen. (2 marks)
(f) Which phrase in paragraph 3 indicates that Celia felt relief? (2 marks)
5
10
15
20
- 5 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
 (g) According to paragraph 4, what is the conflict between Mrs. Wilson and the 
children? (1 mark )
 (h) What metaphorical expression in paragraph 4 indicates that the conflict was 
eventually brought into the open? (1 mark )
(i) What does the writer use the word “regimentation” (line 20) to suggest? 
 (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
- 6 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
3. Read the passage below carefully and then answer all the questions that follow.
 Food on the whole offers an incomparable sensory experience. But with baked 
foods - desserts, pastries, pies, cakes - this experience is perfected. All the senses are 
delighted, and the pleasure is somehow heightened by the small portions of these treats 
we consume, relative to other meal components.
First of all they smell like heaven. For many of us, long before we even begin 
to appreciate the other fine things, the power of baked goods holds sway, largely due to 
the aroma that wafts out of the neighbourhood bakeries. It is a smell rich with promise. 
With baked goods you know that the source of that gorgeous scent is quite likely 
something edible. Good bread has a smell that makes you feel like you have walked 
into a warm room off a cold street.
Cakes are a different matter entirely. With the exception of plain, wholesome 
sponge cakes, instead of comforting, the scent of some cakes can be quite maddening. 
Soaked in essence of spices, the scent bursts from them as from ripe fruits. 
Then there’s sound. If you are not in the habit of listening to your cakes as they 
emerge from the oven, I don’t know that there is much point in trying to explain the 
language of baked goods. Something between a sizzle and a bubble, it is a deeply 
satisfying sound that says “I am here. I am ready. I will not disappoint?” But better 
than the sounds of the finished product are those of the preparation stage. Can I really 
be the only person who tries to emulate in her own kitchen the sounds made on 
cooking shows? In the staging of a TV show, batters sound thicker and creamier; the 
wooden spoon against the ceramic bowl so strong and confident; sugar and butter being 
creamed is an exquisite torture.
Adapted from “Not Bread Alone”,
Caribbean Beat No. 67, May-June 2004, p. 63.
 (a) According to the writer, what is the first thing people enjoy about baked foods? 
(1 mark )
 (b) What particular kinds of baked food are described in the passage? (2 marks)
 (c) Identify the expression in paragraph 2 which suggests that most people cannot 
resist the smell of baked foods. (2 marks)
 (d) Identify TWO phrases which suggest the pleasant effect from the smell of 
baked foods. (2 marks)
 (e) To what senses does the writer appeal in paragraphs 2 and 4? (2 marks)
(f) Why does the writer find the sound made by baked food as it is taken from the 
oven to be satisfying? (2 marks)
 (g) What TWO sounds are compared in the final paragraph? (2 marks)
(h) Why does the writer use “exquisite” to describe torture (line 22)? (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
5
10
15
20
- 7 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION C 
(Suggested time: 45 minutes)
Answer ONE question in this section.
Your answer in this section should be approximately 400 to 450 words in length.
You MUST write in Standard English. However, dialect may be used in conversation. 
You may use the answer booklet to jot down a plan of your points or make notes. THIS 
WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on how well you:
(a) used the stimulus provided
(b) developed and organized the content of your writing
(c) used language appropriate to your audience, purpose and content
(d) used appropriate grammar, sentence structure, paragraphs, vocabulary, spelling 
and punctuation.
EITHER
SHORT STORY (Questions 4 and 5)
4. Write a story based on the picture below.
Source: Caribbean Beat, November - December 2006, p. 63.
(35 marks)
- 8 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
OR
5. A cold hand grasped his wrist as he slumped to his knees.
Write a story which includes this sentence. (35 marks)
OR
DESCRIPTION (Question 6) 
6. The streets were filled with pedestrians in anticipation of their new leader.
Describe the mood of the pedestrians and the atmosphere in the streets. (35 marks)
SECTION D
(Suggested time: 30 minutes)
Answer ONE question in this section.
Your answer in this section should be approximately 250 to 300 words in length.
You MUST write in Standard English. You may use the answer booklet to jot down a 
plan of your points or make notes. THIS WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on the
(a) clarity, organization and development of your argument
(b) appropriateness of style for the intended audience
(c) correctness of grammar, sentences, paragraphs, vocabulary, spelling and 
punctuation.
EITHER
7. The government should ban the importation of all fruits and vegetables in support of 
local production.
Write an essay giving your views on this statement. (35 marks)
- 9 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
OR
8. “Hungry students cannot learn. Free lunch should be provided for all secondary school 
students.”
Write an argument EITHER supporting OR opposing this view. (35 marks)
END OF TEST
The Council has made every effort to trace copyright holders. However, if any have 
been inadvertently overlooked, or any material has been incorrectly acknowledged, 
CXC will be pleased to correct this at the earliest opportunity. 
01218020/SPEC 2012
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
EXAMINATION
ENGLISH A
SPECIMEN PAPER 2009
Item No. Key Syllabus
Reference
1 A U.A.
2 D U.A.
3 C U.A.
4 C U.A.
5 A U.A.
6 D U.A.
7 A U.A.
8 C U.A.
9 C U.A.
10 D U.A.
11 D U.A.
12 C U.A.
13 B U.A.
14 A U.A.
15 A U.A.
16 C U.A.
17 C U.A.
18 D U.A.
19 C U.A.
20 B U.A.
21 D U.C.
22 B U.C.
23 D U.C.
24 C U.C.
25 D U.C.
26 C U.C.
27 C U.C.
28 A U.C.
29 D U.C.
30 A U.C.
Item No. Key Syllabus
Reference
31 C U.C.
32 B U.C.
33 A U.C.
34 A U.C.
35 C U.C.
36 B U.C.
37 A U.B.
38 B U.B.
39 C U.B.
40 D U.B.
41 C U.B.
42 D U.B.
43 A U.B.
44 C U.B.
45 C U.D.
46 C U.D.
47 B U.D.
48 C U.C.
49 D U.D.
50 C U.D.
51 D U.D.
52 A U.D.
53 B U.B.
54 C I.B.
55 D U.B.
56 D U.B.
57 C U.B.
58 B U.B.
59 D U.B.
60 B U.B.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH A 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 2 -
Question 1
P1 UNDERSTANDING PROFILE: Maximum - 10 marks Content - 10
 
P2 EXPRESSION PROFILE: Maximum - 20 marks Organisation – 10
 Mechanics - 10 
Marks are to be awarded on the basis of information within the first 120 
words.
Marks will be awarded as follows:
(1) Content - 10 marks
(2) Organisation of Content - 10 marks
(3) Language Usage - 10 marks
(1) CONTENT
The answer will be judged for its adequacy with respect to the 
following criteria within the set word limit:
- accuracy of details (and their original linkages); and 
completeness
- clarity and faithfulness in respect of purpose/intent; and 
appropriateness of message and tone
- attention to perspective/point of view and consistency of focus
(2) ORGANISATION OF CONTENT
- arrangement presented through sequencing, concept of paragraph, 
selection of cohesive ties, achievement of economy.
- selection and arrangement of information resulting in coherent 
structure and sense of audience 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 3 -
Question 1 cont’d
(3) LANGUAGE USAGE
The following will be considered in awarding the grades:
(i) Correct use of structure and language:
- Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses chosen 
must be of the appropriate type)
- Sentences must be clear and meaningful 
- There must be effective and appropriate transition between 
sentences
 
- Subjects and verbs must agree
- Pronouns must agree with their antecedents
- There must be consistency in the use of tense
(ii) Accuracy of mechanics
Correct spelling and punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full 
stops, commas, question marks, etc.)
Marks will be awarded on the following scale:
N.B. 
 1. Students who have performed incompetently in the (1) and 
(2) will be limited to 3 marks in Mechanics of Writing
2. Answers which make consistent use of the words of the 
stimulus text will not be awarded more than 3 marks for 
Mechanics of Writing.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 4 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 1.
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates:
(i)&(ii) Superiority in addressing the criteria
(iii) Excellent, efficient and error-free 
use of language (as indicated under 
points 1 and 2 in Mechanics of 
Writing)
10 10 10
5. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Superiority in addressing the criteria
(iii) Very good use of language though 
there may be the occasional lapse in 
accuracy.
9 9 9 
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i)&(ii) Competence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Effective and accurate use of 
language though there may be a few 
lapses.
7-8 7-8 7-8 
3. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Competence in addressing the criteria
(iii) Some ability to use language 
accurately and effectively but with 
some inconsistency in accurate 
usage.
5-6 5-6 5-6 
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Incompetence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Inability to use language accurately.
OR: Insufficient information presented in 
some area.
4 4 4 
1. Demonstrates: 
(i)&(ii) Incompetence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language. 
OR: Too little information presented to 
make an assessment.
0-3 0-3 0-3 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 5 -
Question 1. cont’d
Sample Summary
The Caribbean is famous for its sporting talents. Although we welcome the 
emphasis on training in some countries, little attention is paid to 
nutrition in the Caribbean. 
Basic dietary provisions should be observed before, during and after 
competitions. The combination of training and nutrition ensures the best 
results without resorting to performance enhancing drugs. The value of 
nutrition can be seen especially where athletes may be attracted to fast 
foods, as well as fads and diets lacking essential nutrients.
The use of illegal drugs is increasing because of the rich rewards of 
winning. We must remember that drugs can harm our health even when we 
retire and we must ensure that our champions are drug-free and worthy role 
models.
 119 words 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 6 -
Question 2
(a) Her air of vulnerability. (2 marks)
(b) It was a hard task for him to live up to the image of being a doctor 
/ to fulfil (live up) to her expectations. (2 marks)
(c) Because she wanted him to become a doctor / dreamed of him becoming a 
doctor. (2 marks)
(d) Because he knew she was willing to sacrifice herself for him.
(2 marks)
(e) Mother and son. (1 marks)
(f) His father worked long hours / that he left early for work and came 
home late at night. (2 marks)
(g) A negative assessment. OR The father was considered to have been a 
failure despite the fact that he had worked hard. OR The son did not 
consider the father to have achieved much. (2 marks)
(h) There was zinc and broken fences / zinc and poverty. Gold lane 
connotes prosperity / riches but in fact it was poverty-stricken with 
zinc for fences. (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 7 -
SECTION 2
Question 3 
(a) negative (2 marks)
(b) never / none / (rhetorical question) (1 mark)
(c) move, swaying to / hooked (2 marks)
(d) there is too much of it / unimaginative (2 marks)
(e) Carnival (2 marks)
(f) Sand (2 marks)
(g) repetition of words beginning with “s” / alliteration (2 marks)
(h) July (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 8 -
Questions 4 and 5 – (Short Story) 35 marks
EXPRESSION C: 35 marks
The following criteria will be used to assess the composition:
(a) Content and relevance of story: 
(i) Story Line/Plot - Action Structure
 - The story line must be clearly developed (e.g. the events 
in the story must be linked appropriately.)
 - Links must be maintained appropriate to the choice of 
technique.
 - Conflict(s) must be satisfactorily resolved.
 - Action must be satisfactorily concluded.
 - Actions/events must be clearly motivated (e.g. there must 
be some plausible reason(s) for the things that happen).
 - Setting must be established (e.g. there must be a clear 
indication of where and when the action takes place).
(ii) Characterisation: 
 - Characters must be believable (e.g. characters must act 
and use language that is consistent with who they are).
 - Any change in character (e.g. personality/behaviour) must 
be clearly established.
 - Characters must be sufficiently developed.
 - Dialogue, when used, should be functional (e.g. may 
develop character, action and atmosphere).
(b) Organisation: 
 - Details/events must be logically and effectively sequenced.
(c) (i) Effective use of language: 
 - Appropriate choice of words to create characters, 
atmosphere and setting.
 - Economic and lively use of language to create story 
elements listed under (a) and (b).
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 9 -
Questions 4 and 5 - (Short Story) 35 marks cont’d 
(ii) Correct use of structures of the language: 
 - Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses 
chosen must be of the appropriate type).
 - Sentences must be clear.
 - Sentences must be meaningful.
 - There must be effective and appropriate transitions 
between sentences and paragraphs.
 - Subjects and verbs must agree.
 - Pronouns must agree with their antecedents.
 - There must be consistency in the use of tense.
(iii) Accuracy of mechanics: 
 - Correct spelling, punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full 
stops, question marks).
 - Paragraphing.
N.B.: If the student’s response satisfies no criteria in (a) page 8, 
the response must be given zero marks.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 10 -
Question 6 (Description) 35 marks
EXPRESSION C: 35 marks
Descriptive Answer
The following criteria will be used to assess the composition: 
(a) Structural Coherence of Description
(i) Description must be clearly constructed and developed 
(e.g. the different components must be linked 
appropriately).
(ii) The different focuses and facets must be linked 
appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus 
vs. peripheral detail). 
(iii) The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer 
must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements.
(iv) Choice of features to be described must be clearly 
motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture.
(b) Relation between object, state of mind, event, etc. being 
described and the language used.
(i) Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent 
within itself.
(ii) Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.) 
must be clearly established.
(iii) If characters are being described, they must be 
sufficiently developed.
(iv) Dialogue, when used, should be functional (e.g. to develop 
character, atmosphere, mood, etc.)
(c) Organisation:- 
(i) Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. 
(d) Effective use of language
(i) Varied and lively use of language to create picture 
elements. 
(ii) Appropriate choice of words to create characters, moods, 
tones, atmosphere and setting. 
 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 11 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 4&5: 
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(i) Excellent manipulation of features of action 
structure and characterization. 
(ii) Excellent organisation.
(iii) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language. 
35-33
5. Suggests: 
(i) Very good manipulation of features of action 
structure characterization.
(ii) Very good organisation.
(iii) Very good use of language though there may be 
the occasional lapse in accuracy.
29-32
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good manipulation of features of action 
structure but with some unevenness in the 
presentation of these features.
(ii) Good organisation.
(iii) Effective and accurate use of language, though 
there may be a few lapses.
18-28
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the manipulation of features 
of action structure.
(ii) Some ability to organise events/ details.
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some slight inconsistency 
in accurate usage.
11-17
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manipulate vital features of 
action structure.
(ii) An inability to organise events and details in 
a logical manner.
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language.
OR: Insufficient information presented in some 
areas.
6-10
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manipulate features of 
action structure.
(ii) Total inability to organise events and details.
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-5 
Note: A response that is too short (less than one page, 200 words) should 
not be given a mark higher than 17/3.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 12 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 6. 
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(iv) Excellent manipulation of descriptive details 
(v) Excellent organisation.
(vi) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language. 35-33
5. Suggests: 
(iv) Very good manipulation of features 
descriptive details 
(v) Very good organisation.
(vi) Very good use of language though there may 
be the occasional lapse in accuracy.
29-32
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good manipulation of descriptive details
(ii) Good organisation.
(iii) Effective and accurate use of language, 
though there may be a few lapses.
18-28
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the manipulation of 
descriptive details.
(ii) Some ability to organise events/ details.
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some slight 
inconsistency in accurate usage.
11-17
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manipulate vital descriptive 
details.
(ii) An inability to organise events and details 
in a logical manner.
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language.
OR: Insufficient information presented in some 
area.
6-10
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manipulate descriptive 
details.
(ii) Total inability to organise events and 
details.
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-5 
Note: A response that is too short (less than one page, 200 words) should 
not be given a mark higher than 17/3.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 13 -
Questions 7-8 (Alternatives) 35 marks 
EXPRESSION D: 35 marks
Marks will be awarded for the following:
Area I:
1. Content - Argument and Comment
(a) The selection of information/details must be relevant to the 
focus of the argument.
(b) The argument must show a clear sense of the writer’s awareness 
of audience (for example, the writer may take the position that 
the audience : (i) knows nothing about the topic or (ii) shares 
basic information about the topic).
(c) The writer must use register and tone appropriate to the 
audience selected.
(d) The writer’s purpose must be clearly linked to audience needs 
(indicated in (b) (i) and (ii), for example, (i) to inform, 
persuade and convince of a point of view (ii) to 
persuade/convince)
(e) The supporting details that are used to develop the argument 
must fulfil one or more of the following functions: (i) expand, 
(ii) explain, (iii) illustrate (e.g. by means of anecdotes, etc) 
the main argument(s).
(f) In illustrating, explaining or expanding the argument, the 
writer must make use of a range of strategies, for example, 
defining, showing causes and effects, making meaningful 
comparisons.
(g) The writer must argue from a consistent point of view, this 
means the writer may anticipate the opposition’s arguments but 
must not contradict his/her own argument(s)/position. 
2. Organisation: - Logical development and reasoning
(a) The writer must present the details in a logical sequence that 
maintains the focus of the argument.
(b) The logical sequence of ideas/details must be clear within 
sentences, across sentences in paragraphs and between 
paragraphs.
(c) The conclusions the writer draws must arise naturally and 
logically from the arguments presented.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 14 -
Questions 7-8 (Alternatives) 35 marks cont’d
Area II
Expression (A) skills ( marks)
1. Correct use of structures of the language:
 - Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses chosen must 
be of the appropriate type). 
 - Sentences must be clear.
 - Sentences must be meaningful.
 - There must be effective and appropriate transitions between 
sentences and between paragraphs.
 - Subjects and verbs must agree.
 - Pronouns must agree with their antecedents.
 - There must be consistency in the use of tense.
2. Accuracy of mechanics: 
 - Correct spelling, punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full stops, 
question marks)
 - Paragraphing
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 15 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 4&5 : 
Area
I
Area 
II
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(i) Excellent management of argument and content 
as indicated under Area I. (a) - (g). 
(ii) Excellent organisation of arguments and 
details as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(c). 
(iii) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language as indicated under Area II.
24-23 11-10
5. Suggests: 
(i) Very good management of argument and 
content as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(g). 
(ii) Very good organisation of arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Very good use of language though there may 
be the occasional lapse in accuracy.
22-20 9-8 
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good management of argument and content as 
indicated under Area I. (a) - (g). 
(ii) Good organisation of arguments and details. 
(iii) Good use of language, though there may be a 
few lapses.
19-12 7-6 
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the management of argument 
and content as indicated under Area I. (a) 
- (g). 
(ii) Some ability to organise arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some inconsistency in 
accurate usage.
11-8 5-3 
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manage vital features of 
argument as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(g). 
(ii) An inability to organise arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language. 
OR: Insufficient information presented. 
7-5 2 
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manage features of 
argument. 
(ii) Total inability to organise arguments. 
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-4 0-1 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
JANUARY 2004
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examination in January 2004 followed the format used in previous years. Paper
01, the multiple choice paper, tested the Understanding profile of the syllabus, and
Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the Expression component of the syllabus
as well as the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
When performance in 2004 is compared with performance in 2003, an increase in the
percentage of candidates achieving Grade III and above is evident. In 2003, 36 per
cent of the candidates achieved Grade I to III, while in 2004, 54 per cent achieved
Grade III or higher.
The overall mean in 2003 was 52.5 whereas in January 2004 it was 57.90. The overall
improvement is attributable to improvement in Paper 01 and in all areas of Paper 02.
Performance in the Comprehension section of Paper 02 showed the most dramatic
change, and the overall quality of the responses in this section was impressive.
The improvement in performance this year, expecially, in comprehension, is wel￾come. Hopefully, this level of performance can be maintained.
DETAILED COMMENTS
GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Section One
Question 1 (Expression)
This question tested candidates’ ability to summarise information given in an adver￾tisement. Generally, candidates seemed to understand what was required of them,
although far too many exceeded the maximum length specified in the instructions.
Candidates should be made aware that the part of their answer that goes beyond the
specified maximum length will NOT be marked by the Examiners.
- 3 -
 The text this year contained several technical terms. Candidates were required to re￾use a number of words from the test, rather than their own language, as is generally
required of this answer. It was, however, still necessary for candidates to take all the
itemised technical information and put it into prose, that is, in the form of well con￾structed, grammatically and semantically logical sentences.
Generally, candidates were able to identify the main points of the advertisement.
There was still, however, the need to be selective and for candidates to be aware that
all the pieces of information were not of equal value and significance in capturing the
basic meaning of the text.
Teachers should remember that summarising is a specialised skill which requires
special attention and emphasis, and should provide their students with abundant prac￾tice, on a variety of textual stimulus material.
Section Two
There was a general improvement when compared with January 2003, although a
number of candidates failed to score any marks on each question in this section.
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage from
a work of fiction written in Standard English. Candidates were required to show an
appreciation of the writer’s craft, the impressions which the work creates, and rela￾tionships between characters, rather than simply an understanding of the overtly stated
facts. Some candidates were unable to deduce what the setting of the text was (it was
the waiting room of an Embassy), and this affected their responses to some of the
parts of this question.
It was gratifying to see the improvement in performance. In response to Part (f),
many students answered correctly, with a variety of lexical choices, including ‘pro￾fessional’. Teachers are to be congratulated and are urged to make every effort to
ensure that the improvement is sustained, by making clear to candidates the particular
nature of the text for this question and the type of response required.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage on
the importance of investing in social services. The overall performance on this ques￾tion was good, and there was, no substantial difference between the performances in
- 4 -
Question 2 and Question 3.
Many candidates failed to answer correctly one of the interpretive questions; they
were unable to distiguish between “narrative, argumentative and descriptive” in a
characterisation of the passage. Part (d) also went beyond the mere factual, and
required candidates to perceive and appreciate the metaphorical expression of the
author. This part was quite well answered.
Teachers should make sure that candidates are able to perceive the different kinds
of responses required, for example, the difference between “What, according to the
passage ...?” and “What effect ...?”, “What impression ..?”. Some candidates left
these latter questions unanswered, which may suggest that they did not quite under￾stand what was required.
There still seems to be some uncertainty among some candidates as to what is a
“phase” (vis-à-vis “word”, “sentence”). Part (d) asked for `three phrases’. Some
candidates gave entire sentences. Generally speaking, candidates should be made
aware that their responses should be precise, not long-winded and explanatory, and
should most particularly NOT reproduce lengthy portions of the passage, perhaps
in the hope that somewhere in that volume lies the correct answer.
Section Three
Question 4, 5, 6 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continu￾ous prose. The most popular choice was Question 5, but Question 6 had the
highest mean. These were only a relatively small range of difference among the three
questions.
Some candidates had difficulty fitting the statement in Question 5 into their stories.
Thus these stories seemed to come to an abrupt end without the final statement
being well motivated.
There was some reduction in the incidence of candidates merely describing the
picture stimulus (Question 4). Teachers should continue to stress to candidates that
the picture stimulus requires the imaginative creation of a story. In giving freedom
to their imagination, however, candidates should not simply write their own story
unrelated (or only barely so) to the stimulus.
- 5 -
Question 6 was the most successfully done, and some candidates achieved the high￾est scores (up to 24/25) on this question. It will have been observed that in Question
5 the main protagonist is male, while in Questions 4 and 6, it is female. The examiners
strive to make the question paper gender-equal, but these were no real reason why
males should write only about their own gender and females likewise. A good short
story writer should be able to write about both male and female protagonists and
candidates should be encouraged to practise writing about a variety of themes.
While some candidates have more of a flair for short story writing than others, it is
clear that those who like to read, whatever their subjects may be, become more
familiar with words and experiences and thus give themselves an advantage over
those who do not.
Section Four
Question 7 and 8 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to write persuasively and present sound argu￾ments in Standard English. These was a marked preference for Question 8 over
Question 7, and in addition the mean for Question 8 was substantially higher than the
Question 7 mean. A further dramatic difference was the much larger percentage of
candidates receiving zero marks for Question 7 than for Question 8.
Question 7 was the more problematic of the two questions. A large number of
candidates mis-interpreted the terms “independent” and “patriotic”, both in general
and as they relate to newspapers in particular. These concepts should not be unfamil￾iar to an educated Caribbean young person and schools may wish to consider whether
sufficient attention is being paid to such basic concepts as media bias/independence/
partiality and loyalty to country/party/government, in Social Studies and Communi￾cation classes.
In one, particularly extreme case, “independent” was related to one’s ability to cook
and keep house. In other cases, there was no attempt to relate the concepts to the
particular case of the Media.
Most candidates chose Question 8. It was clearly within the current experiences of
the candidates and many were able to provide personal anecdotes to support their
arguments.
- 6 -
It is very important that candidates notice and respond to all the parts of the proposi￾tions, and to the precise instructions (‘write a letter’, ‘write an essay giving your
views’, and ‘EITHER supporting OR opposing’). For example, in Question 7,
some candidates ignored the specific allusion to ‘a newspaper’, and in Question 8
some candidates ignored ‘punished as adults’ and were content simply to argue that
16 year olds deserved to be punished for crimes committed.
The usual argumentation and writing/composition inadequacies were evident: mere
assertions without any supportive arguments or examples; misuse of pronouns; in￾correct subject-verb agreement especially where the noun subject is distant from the
verb; punctuation including paragraphing; and spelling, especially ‘there’, ‘their’.
Students should be made aware that English spelling is not generally and consistently
phonetic and the spelling of many words has to be learned individually, which is best
achieved through careful reading, punctuation including paragraphing.
GENERAL ADVICE
For the third time in recent years, one candidate was found to reproduce a published
story with amazing accuracy while another candidate reproduced a variant of a “CXC
Best Story”, retaining several chunks from the original. Teachers need to remind
candidates who are preparing to write the examination that at the very best, short
stories that demonstrate a lack of originality will not be awarded high scores. At
worst, short stories that bear a very close similarity to previous short stories or to
published work may raise suspecion of irregularity.
Teachers are again advised that, in the preparation of candidates, they should make
sure that they are familiar with the syllabus. The specific tasks set will vary from year
to year but they all fit the specifications set out in the syllabus. Further, it must be
noted that a new revised syllabus will take effect for examination from May/June
2006. Candidates should be encouraged to write legibly, conform to the instructions
(for example, maximum length of answers) and to complete the required number of
questions set.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examinations in 2004 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
In 2004, 49.5 per cent of the candidates at General Proficiency achieved Grade III and above, while 19.1 per
cent of the Basic Proficiency candidates achieved similar grades. The number of candidates taking the General
Proficiency examination was 81 120, while 3 068 sat for the Basic Proficiency examination.
The decline in the number of candidates taking Basic Proficiency continued in 2004, the numbers over the past
four years have been 4 502 (2001); 3 792 (2002); 3 777 (2003); 3 068 (2004).
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Basic Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2004 showed only a very marginal upward change over 2003. The
mean score in 2003, out of a possible 60, was 25.08 and this moved to 25.58 in 2004.
General Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2004 showed a slight decline when compared with 2003. The mean
score in Paper 01 moved downward from 34.63 in 2003 to 33.03 in 2004, out of a possible 60.
PAPER 02 - FREE RESPONSE
Basic Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 02 in 2004 was better than in 2003. The mean score increased from 22.10 in
2003 to 25.72 in 2004, out of a possible 80. Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 in
2004 was as follows:
Section 1 – Summary Skills (out of 20 marks) 5.06
Section 2 – Comprehension (out of 24 marks) 9.87
Section 3 _ Story Writing (out of 16 marks) 5.17
Section 4 – Argument (out of 20 marks) 5.62
- 3 -
General Proficiency
In Paper 02 performance, as indicated by a comparison of the section means in 2003 and 2004, is summarised
as follows:
Section 1 (Summary skills): there was an improvement in performance compared with 2003: 8.20 (2003) and
9.23 (2004)
Section 2 (Understanding): there was an improvement in performance compared with 2003: 8.22 (2003) and
9.30 (2004)
Section 3 (Story telling): there was no substantial difference in performance between 2003 and 2004: 8.84
(2003) and 8.79 (2004)
Section 4 (Argument): there was a slight decline in performance compared with 2003: 9.29 (2003) and 8.66
(2004)
Candidates’ performance in expression tasks on Paper 02 (that is, Sections 1, 3 and 4) was very similar in 2004
to what it was in 2003, with means of 26.68 and 26.33 in 2004 and 2003 respectively, out of a possible 75.
A comparison of the average mark in the four sections shows that there is little difference in performance
across the sections. It could suggest that teachers are covering all four areas evenly.
General Advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in
all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently
used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas,
upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers, whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
In Section 1, when a straightforward summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically
within the word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale, the CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates; it
should not be treated as a deletion exercise or a copying exercise.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be trained
to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked and to
frame their answers appropriately. For example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they
say ‘give a phrase’; at other times still they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give
precisely what they are asked to give. Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as
the passages on which the questions are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require
paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long
extract from the passage is a bad strategy, one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in others. Every
candidate doing this examination should have read the best stories from preceding years in order to get a sense
of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC.) These stories, however, should not be
memorised and reproduced with slight alterations.
- 4 -
In the case of Section 4, candidates should note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language
and presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions
carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that support their
points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some inexplicable reason, some candidates operate
on the assumption (consciously) or unconsciously) that they must agree with the opinion given and that if they
do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a
way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will achieve
higher scores than those they earn by merely agreeing with what they perceive to be the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE
Question 1 (Expression)
In this question candidates were asked to read an extract from a report on migration and to write a summary of
it in no more than 100 words. Candidates had to select the main information, organise it logically and present
it in standard English. All three components are important, but perhaps logical organisation of the information
is of the greatest importance in the teaching exercise. Candidates should be made aware that a summary is not
simply a series of statements presented with no expressed links between them.
Candidates were expected to identify the classes of migrants; the direction of migration; the relationship between
migration, population growth/decline and the labour market; and the consequences of migration on source
country and destination.
Performance on this question was slightly better than it was last year. However, there are still too many
candidates who pay absolutely no attention to the word limit given or dishonestly write an incorrect number of
words at the end. This latter strategy does not work.
Teachers should:
 (i) advise students against relying heavily on the original text and making just a few minor changes; and
using a deletion strategy to try to reduce the number of words in the original text
 (ii) give students more practice in distilling essential information and expressing it, as far as possible, in
their own words
(iii) advise students not to repeat points or insert too many illustrative examples of points made
(iv) above all remind students to observe the stated length
Advice to Teachers
In the training of students in summary writing, teachers should use a variety of selections, including sources
outside the textbooks, such as daily newspapers and current popular magazines. Teachers should remind
students to work with what is given – real-life material has imperfections and part of the training in summary
writing is to be able to determine what is important or critical and what is not in such material. Report and
summary writing is as much about arranging relevant points as it is about picking out the main points in what
someone else has said or written. In order to reflect the original accurately, attention should be paid to time
sequence and cause and effect relationships, as they occur in the original. Practice in the effective use of words
such as because, although, as a result and in spite of the fact that, which link clauses (containing relevant
points), will help immensely the task of summary and report writing.
- 5 -
SECTION TWO
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Eugenia O’neal’s “The Parillon Sisters”. For the most part, candidates responded correctly to
the items (a), (b), (c), (d) and (g). Item (e) was answered correctly ( = to indicate that it was not English) by
only a small percentage of candidates. Item (f) did not ask for words from the passage, which meant that those
candidates who interpreted it in that way restricted themselves unnecessarily. Item (h) was not answered
correctly by most candidates; the answer (the attitude) required was ‘pity’ or some equivalent. As usual, as
soon as the questions go beyond “who” and “what”, a great number of candidates find it difficult to cope with
inferences and implications.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward by the editor of the Weekend
Nation newspaper about the relationship between freedom and the law. Item (a) was answered incorrectly by
a great number of candidates because they did not pay attention to the instruction that only a phrase should be
given, not the whole of the first sentence. Items (b) and (c) were correctly answered by most candidates. The
answer to (c) hinged on the understanding of the word ‘ironically’, which involves an opposite relationship
(that is, contrary to expectation) between one thing and another. Item (d) required candidates to link the word
latter to a preceding idea but only a minority of candidates managed to do this successfully. Item (e), which
was intended as a straightforward question requiring an understanding of punctuation (Our supreme law, our
Constitution = Our supreme law is our Constitution), was answered correctly by only a small percentage of
candidates. Item (f) required candidates to solve a simple verbal logical problem. This was not correctly done
by most candidates. The two-part answer to (g) did not present any major problems.
Advice to Teachers
Reading of material from outside the Caribbean should help to expand the passive vocabulary and general
knowledge of students. Teachers still have to do more work on the literary devices used by writers in order to
get students to move beyond literal interpretations. In the explanation of literary devices and specific phrases/
sentences used by writers, candidates have to be accurate and precise in their answers. Teachers should
dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which really conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE
Questions 4, 5 and 6 (Expression)
Candidates did not seem to have any difficulty understanding the topics set, but there were still too many who
did not know what elements are required in short stories or who could not demonstrate those elements in their
writing. There were some candidates who wrote brilliant stories and generally candidates seemed to be reasonably
well prepared for this section of the examination. On the other hand, this section, as it usually does, exposed
the weaknesses of candidates who had not mastered the fundamentals of writing in English.
The picture stimulus in Question 4 seemed to appeal to many candidates and encouraged a variety of stories,
but this year there were more stories of a better standard. Happily, there was a smaller number of candidates
this year who just described the picture. This question elicited several excellent responses, including the one
deemed to be the ‘best story’. On the other hand, some stories had no more than a tenuous connection with the
stimulus. Teachers should remind candidates that when a story has no connection whatsoever to any of the
three stimuli given, it automatically is given zero marks.
- 6 -
Question 5 was a fairly popular choice and it produced a number of action stories. Some of these were very
good and imaginative in some cases and realistic in others. Some of these stories were awarded marks in the
top ranges. On the other hand, some candidates did not convincingly link the two parts of the stimulus together
in their stories or did not convincingly suggest that ‘life would be different’ from then on.
Question 6 was not a very popular choice. Candidates seemed to have difficulty tying the two parts of the
stimulus together. This question did not produce any outstanding stories.
Advice to Teachers
Teachers should not encourage students to over-indulge in the expression of literary devices. There has to be a
match between the setting and the action. Students whose stories are impressive are those who use details to
create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Teachers need to give all students practice in action-oriented stories and
not restrict choices to emotional stories. Boys seem to prefer the former and not the latter, and teachers, if they
want all their students to succeed, should be aware of this. Students should be encouraged, as often as possible,
to interpret topics in a positive and wholesome way and not to restrict themselves to situations of poverty,
degradation and stress. Training in short story writing should include a lot of oral work and the telling of funny
stories and anecdotes where there is a concentration on the characters and what they say. Training in short story
writing must stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading. Although there is no penalty for
writing stories that are longer than is suggested in the rubric, a perusal of the scripts reveals that longer stories
tend to be weaker as they often get out of control.
SECTION FOUR
Question 7 and 8 (Expression)
On the whole, responses in this section were satisfactory. Candidates seemed to find the topics interesting and
manageable.
In responding to the statement in Question 7 many candidates did not address all of the points and so automatically
weakened their argument. It is necessary in a question such as this for candidates to be methodical in their
answers and not to contradict earlier points made.
In the case of Question 8 most candidates agreed with the topic statement, sometimes passionately, but did little
to show any further insightfulness. Some good responses from among those who disagreed pointed out the
problems and difficulties involved in such a proposal (for example, why 15 years of age, why only young men,
who would pay for the training, where would the trainees be housed). There were many spirited and well
written responses from candidates supporting the proposal as well as those opposing it.
Advice to Teachers
More attention should be paid to the organisation of arguments, that is, paragraphing of different points with
the relevant supporting evidence. The language should be clear and the reader should have no doubt about the
writer’s position on the issues. Candidates should not contradict their stated position. Poor sentence structure,
punctuation and spelling are sources of distraction and cause the reader to lose the focus of an argument.
Careful re-reading should help to remove such distractions.
- 7 -
Basic Proficiency
SECTION ONE
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage from a daily newspaper – a commissioner of
police’s report on offences and crimes during the year 2002. The majority of candidates showed a reasonable
level of understanding of the passage, though numbers and simple statistics proved difficult for many. Most,
however, in their summary, did not mention the point about the challenges faced by the police. The stronger
candidates were able to identify the main ideas in the passage and present a response largely using their own
words. The weaker candidates often exceeded the word limit and presented responses in the exact words of the
passage. Many of these simply reproduced sections of the passage joining them together incoherently. The
majority of these failed to master the mechanics of the language.
Advice to Teachers
Teachers need to ensure that their students receive more practice in summary writing since Question 1 is
compulsory. Special attention should be paid to concord, tense and sentence structure.
SECTION TWO
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage. The chosen extract
was from Ama Ata Aidoo’s ‘Changes’. In general, the items were answered fairly well, though items (b) and
(c) proved to be much more challenging than the others. Very few candidates answered (b) correctly. In the
case of Item (d) (what kind of person), some candidates incorrectly interpreted this to mean occupation rather
than personality.
Advice to Teachers
Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set on the paper, questions requiring precise
answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure that students read questions a number of
times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the whole passage, candidates should also re￾read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to make sure that what they are thinking of
writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re-read what they have written to make sure
that it makes sense to someone reading it. As is the case generally, candidates would be helped tremendously
if they read more, which would make them more accustomed to written material.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a persuasive passage. In the one chosen, the
writer argued for a lengthening of the school year for American students. Items (a), (e) and (f) proved difficult
for most candidates. In many cases the candidates’ responses to Item (a) were not clear as to whether summer
was getting shorter in terms of days or whether it was coming to an end. In the case of Item (e), candidates
seemed to know what the word ‘attitude’ meant, but were confused with the word ‘sobering’. For Item (f)
many candidates incorrectly identified the American students as the correct response instead of students of
other industrialised nations.
- 8 -
Advice to Teachers
In preparation for Section Two teachers should give students more practice in comprehending extracts of writing
other than narrations. In fact, teachers should use various types of material from varying sources. Students
should get constant practice in responding directly and concisely to questions asked, using their own words
instead of lifting large pieces from the passage given. Students need to expand their vocabulary and one
effective way of doing this is by reading more.
SECTION THREE
Questions 4, 5 and 6 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively by writing a story based on a given
stimulus. Question 5 was the most popular choice and the least popular was Question 4, which was poorly
interpreted. In Questions 5 and 6 many candidates simply added the statement to the end of their story without
proper linkage. The majority of those who attempted Question 4 did not produce stories, but rather presented
descriptions of the boy or expositions on child care and abuse. Most of those who attempted Question 5 gave
depictions of a classroom scene so that the statement with ‘the pen’ would be relevant. However, there were a
few who depicted a farm scene because for them ‘the pen’ was an animal pen. A few of those who attempted
Question 6 based their stories on mysterious happenings, like ghosts and unidentified flying objects, but the
majority wrote stories about lies, theft and rape. The better candidates were able to develop a strong and
credible story line, presenting their work in acceptable standard English. The weaker candidates had difficulty
presenting a good story line and this was compounded by problems in the mechanics of grammar and sentence
construction. Many merely presented reports of events without conflict.
Advice to Teachers
Students should be encouraged to read more widely and practise writing more often. Students should get more
practice in writing stories based on pictures. Teachers should spend more time with students on the basic
elements of story writing. For example, students need more practice in incorporating dialogue into story writing.
They should also be given more exposure to figurative expressions.
SECTION FOUR
Questions 7 and 8 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to write persuasively in Standard English and to present sound arguments.
Many more candidates did Question 8 than Question 7. In Question 7 very few candidates were able to distinguish
between a reason and an excuse. Question 8 elicited many responses that vaguely addressed the various qualities
needed for success (for example, determination, manners, respect, hard work) rather than focus on skills and
knowledge. The stronger candidates gave evidence of persuasive techniques such as rhetorical questions,
proper use of statistics and appeal to authority. Many of these used what seemed like real life experiences to
support their positions. The weaker candidates were often very repetitive in presenting their argument. Errors
in the mechanics of writing were prevalent and many had difficulty writing continuous prose in standard English.
Often the structures used gave evidence of interference from the vernacular.
Advice to Teachers
More time needs to be spent on oral English to give the students familiarity and experience with the patterns
and rhythms of standard English. Teachers need to allot some time to teaching students to write clear opinion
statements which are supported by relevant examples.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2005 Caribbean Examinations Council ®.
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 2005
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The table below shows the marks assigned to the different papers by profiles.
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Multiple Essay
Choice
Understanding 60*/35+ 25*/15+ 85*/50+
Expression – 75 75
 TOTAL 35 90 125
* raw score + computed score
The statistics this year have to be interpreted differently because there were two examinations at General
Proficiency – one for the Caribbean generally and one for Guyana specifically. Overall comparison with
previous years may be somewhat misleading because Guyana statistics are usually below the average and
consequently removing Guyana from the general statistics causes the average to rise.
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 (Caribbean minus Guyana) 2005 (Guyana)
49.53 49.60 52.70 47.02
The performance mean (out of a total of 125) for the examination this year and previous years is as follows:
 (2003) 50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (Carib) (2005) 52.94 (Guy)
Average performance on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 (Caribbean) 2005 (Guyana)
34.63 33.09 33.67 28.78
- 3 -
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 2005
(Carib) (Guyana)
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 11.02
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 11.53
Section 3 Story Writing 8.84 8.79 9.70 8.29
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 10.26
A comparison of the average mark in the four sections for 2005 (Caribbean minus Guyana) shows that there
was a decline in performance in Section 1 (Summary skills). There are still too many candidates who come to
the examination with no knowledge of what a summary entails. The rise in the average mark for Argument is
attributable to the accessibility of the topics given.
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in all
areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently used
ones such as colons, semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper
case and lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be trained
to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked. For
example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they say ‘give a phrase’; at other times still
they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give.
Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as the passages on which the questions
are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to
a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy,
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in others. Every
candidate doing this examination should have read the best story from preceding years in order to get a sense of
what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC). These stories, however, should not be
memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. Although the question paper states word limits as mainly
approximations, the experience has been that the better candidates tend to write stories that fall within or not
too far out of the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of
control and weak. Often too, the candidates have insufficient time left to complete the paper properly. Teachers
are encouraged to help their candidates to plan their stories, focusing on building plots, intensifying conflict,
and creating a good sense of characters, instead of merely relating one or a string of events.
- 4 -
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and presentation
of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure
they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent
and clear in their presentation. Some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is,
however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most
likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think are
the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency (All territories except Guyana)
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read a passage taken from a supermarket magazine, identify the
problem (about the processing of chicken) as stated in the passage and to give Somerfield’s response to it in no
more than 120 words. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose
as in the model below:
In response to concerns that some chickens that are imported have a higher water content and
possibly other animal proteins, Somerfield has issued a statement assuring the public that its mission
is to provide quality chicken.
Somerfield further states that although it is legal to add water and proteins to chicken, if the
labelling does not adequately specify the contents, this may deceive the consumer. Somerfield assures
the public that its chickens, chilled, frozen, local or imported, undergo a process that uses water in a
controlled way for rinsing at different stages of the operation. No protein is added. Furthermore,
Somerfield has outside analysis done by an independently certified and sophisticated laboratory to
ensure quality chickens. (117 words/or below)
Performance on Question 1 this year was worse than last year. There are still too many candidates who pay
absolutely no attention to the word limit given. Some candidates did not put the reading material in proper
perspective/context and did not recognize or did not understand the statement “Adapted from Somerfield
magazine”. As usual, many candidates lifted relative portions of the passage verbatim or paraphrased them
indiscriminately. Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory reading and writing skills, assisted by a
fine vocabulary and the ability to write with purpose and a sense of audience.
Advice
To facilitate preparation for this section of the paper teachers should:
 i) remind candidates to observe the stated length.
 ii) drill candidates in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that
candidates read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical.
iii) help candidates to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills
(comprehension and composition skills)
iv) help candidates to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:-
a) using one’s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness
- 5 -
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and situa￾tion or context
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing and reading
e) correct mechanics of the language
v) stimulate candidates to read widely so that there can be an easier connection with the stimulus mate￾rial.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
This section requires candidates to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is
expected that candidates have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some ques￾tions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, candidates should know how to select words or
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also candidates need to do as the question asks: if
it requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an indication that
the candidate does not know exactly what the answer is. This is a recurrent problem which is likely to be the
kind that would respond to more oral and written practice in class with immediate feedback and discussion.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Anthony Winkler’s Going Home to Teach. The following were deemed to be the correct
answers. In the case of (a) and (d) suitable alternatives were accepted.
(a) officious/pompous
(b) three members of staff
(c) moored; ocean
(d) He disliked it
(e) Her ill-fitting dentures made her appear bad tempered, but she really had a pleasant personality
(f) School administrator/principal/headmaster
(g) She used to scold the labourers for their swearing
(a) Weaker candidates simply felt that the author thought of or was representing Dr Levy as a king. Many
of them did not pay attention to the wording of the question – “What opinion does he want you to
have?”, NOT “what does he say”.
(b) This question required candidates to make a simple mathematical deduction. Many could not. It ap￾pears that several included Dr Levy and therefore gave ‘four’ as the answer.
(c) Most candidates got one or the other of the two words (“moored”, “ocean”), but only a few got both
and many got neither. This suggests that candidates either do not know the term “metaphor” or do not
fully appreciate how it works. A few candidates ignored the stipulation that said “two words” and
wrote phrases. They received no marks as there was no indication that they knew what the words were.
(d) The question required candidates to summarize the author’s feelings about Dr Levy’s office. Most
candidates gave weak answers, answers that simply described the office.
(e) This question required evidence. Some candidates paraphrased; others simply quoted.
(f) Many candidates deduced that Dr Levy must be the principal of an institution or some kind of school
administrator. However, several candidates simply assumed that “Dr” meant medical doctor or dentist.
(g) This question also asked for evidence. Candidates needed to select the words that answered the ques￾tion (“boisterous labourers below whose profanity occasionally drifted in and buzzed her ears” did not
answer the question).
- 6 -
The responses suggest that many candidates understood the passage at the literal level. A large number also
seem to have understood some of the inner meaning, but did not understand what the questions required of
them. This seems to result from insufficient practice in, not simply how to answer questions, but also in how to
be confident about their own thoughts, how to express those thoughts in relation to specific questions and how
to make those thoughts clear to other people reading them.
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward in an article titled “Captur￾ing the Power of Classroom Assessment”. The following were deemed to be the correct answers.
(a) To remove the barriers to learning/to help candidates to overcome difficulty and learn.
(b) Teachers still pass on information to candidates/Candidates are still expected to learn it/Teachers still
employ a familiar variety of classroom assessments/Candidates still ask the critical question.
(c) Poking fun at candidates’ focus on the test above all else/trivialising their concern with the test.
(d) It seeks to involve the reader, get the reader to share his point of view/It seeks to establish solidarity/
direct appeal.
(e) He is careful in making his statements/not dogmatic/moderate/guarded; he is seeking to convince the
reader that he is reasonable, unbiased.
(f) It will allow teachers to assess candidates’ growth and development and identify their individual strengths
and weaknesses.
Candidates did well on questions that required no more than quoting directly from the passage. Thus, candi￾dates seemed to have little difficulty in answering (a), (b), and (f). In contrast, understanding the ‘writer’s
intent’ posed a challenge for many candidates – implicit meanings were not fully understood. Thus, (c) and (e)
proved difficult for many candidates. In attempts to answer questions, candidates wrote long sentences and
paragraphs hoping that the answer would emerge somehow.
Advice
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get candidates to move beyond literal interpretations. In the
explanation of literary devices and specific phrases and sentences used by writers, candidates have to be
accurate and precise in their answers. Teachers should dissuade candidates from giving long-winded answers
which seek to conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create
atmosphere and mood and good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving
like reports, with weak language. There were several candidates who attempted to use words and structures
with which they were not familiar. The result was that what they wrote was often verbose, sometimes unintel￾ligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help candidates feel comfortable with the sim￾plicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling based,
for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting class pro￾ductions – for listening, writing and peer interaction.
- 7 -
Two problems appearing on scripts in recent years and evident again this year were:
a) an element of what appears to be plagiarism or the writing of rehearsed stories with the ques￾tion stimulus merely tacked on;
b) essays that are not stories.
In the case of (a) teachers are advised to encourage candidates to learn from others but not represent other
people’s work as their own. On (b) candidates should be told and reminded that total failure to answer the
question results in zero marks being given to the response.
Some candidates also seem unable to differentiate description from story, especially when the stimulus is a
picture (as was the case with Question 4). Teachers should spend time helping candidates to appreciate the
power of description in storytelling but should stress the need for a story to do more than describe. This is likely
to become even more important in relation to next year’s paper which is expected to have topics for story as
well as description.
Often candidates’ ignorance of basic mechanics and spelling interferes with the examiner’s appreciation of the
story; sometimes the problem is not so great but is noticeable and affects the candidates’ marks.
Advice
Teachers should not encourage candidates to over-indulge in the expression of literary devices. There has to be
a match between the setting and the action. Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant
details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Teachers need to give all candidates practice in action-ori￾ented stories and not restrict choices to emotional stories. Candidates should be encouraged, as often as possi￾ble, to interpret topics in a positive and wholesome way and not to restrict themselves to situations of poverty,
degradation and stress. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting,
editing and proof reading.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
Candidates displayed similar strengths and weaknesses in writing argumentatively as in previous years,
although there were signs that candidates are being engaged more in how to structure their arguments. Never￾theless, too many candidates lack an awareness of topical issues. There is clear indication that they are unin￾formed about social and environmental factors within the region and globally and therefore experience great
difficulty in responding adequately to the topics. Candidates at this stage of their education need to read more
about what is happening around them; get information that can inform their opinion; and see how opinions are
expressed in various media. Despite the apparent ‘closeness’ of the topics to the candidates’ experiences, too
many candidates were unable to take their arguments to the level expected. Some who have an opinion express
their position in somewhat parochial and pedestrian ways. Others who had one idea kept repeating that idea
throughout the essay.
It is noticeable where candidates have been ‘taught’ how to organize their points in paragraphs. In a few cases
candidates had very similar beginning and closing statements. For example, several responses from the same
centre had essays that began: “It is fundamentally correct ...” and ended: “I conclude by restating...” This kind
of slavish reproduction should not be encouraged.
- 8 -
In summary the following were identified in candidates’ responses:
Candidates who displayed superiority understood the demands of the topic; identified their audience;
cogently presented their points and argued effectively using appropriate devices. Competent candi￾dates demonstrated some ability to raise points, but faltered on argumentation. Weak responses came
from candidates who had some knowledge of the topics, but lacked the skills of argumentation and
displayed very weak language skills.
General Proficiency (Guyana)
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to write a letter to their school principal pointing out the most important
information about an advertised youth symposium. Candidates were expected to identify the time and place of
the symposium, the topics to be covered, the contacts and deadlines. Candidates were expected to organise the
information and present it in continuous prose in not more than 100 words, as in the model below:
I am inviting you to the National Youth Symposium sponsored by the government and NGOs
on the Challenges of Adolescent Health to be held at the Obana Conference Centre, January 8,
2006. Sessions are designed for youth and other persons. The sessions will be conducted by
experts in the field of nutrition, human sexuality and diseases, drugs and other social issues.
Bukawela Tudor will deliver the feature address. There will be testimonials from other influen￾tial young people and live entertainment. For information on registration and other details
contact Yvonne Dalton at 111 2615 by December 15, 2005.
The format of the presentation lent itself to better summarising and there was consequently a much higher
average achieved on this question than in previous years.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
Candidates were given a passage from O.R. Dathorne’s Dele’s child and were asked to answer eight questions
on the passage.
(c) was the simplest of the questions requiring only a restatement of the last part of sentence 2 in paragraph 2.
Most candidates had no trouble with this question, even though some thought it necessary to write lengthy
paraphrases.
(a) was also a simple question which could be answered after a first reading of the passage. Only a minority of
candidates had difficulty with this question.
(b) presented most candidates with little difficulty because it involved a straightforward contrast between
sentence 2 and sentence 3.
(d) required candidates to read paragraph 2 and to come up with a word or phrase summarising the narrator’s
state of mind as evidenced in words such as ‘spit at’, ‘hate’, ‘I checked myself suddenly’, ‘viciously’, ‘Damn
them’. Any equivalent of ‘unstable’, ‘resentful’ or ‘bitter’ was acceptable. Many candidates did not understand
the phrase ‘state of mind’.
(e) may initially have seemed difficult, but the repetition of the idea of stillness/quietness no less than five
times in lines 4-7 made the answer relatively simple.
- 9 -
(f) sought to find out whether candidates understood a sentence final comment by the narrator showing the
difference between what was officially announced and the narrator’s view of the matter (that he did not agree
with it). This question proved difficult for most candidates.
(g) required the candidates to identify the narrator’s reaction of hostility or anger to not being remembered.
This partially overlapped with (d). Performance on this question was moderate.
(h) required candidates to identify ‘kind/kindness’ as a word being used sarcastically by the narrator. Most
candidates did not seem to understand what sarcasm meant.
Question 3
Candidates were presented with an argumentative letter written to the editor of the Gleaner newspaper and
asked to answer six questions on it.
(b) and (c) proved straightforward for most candidates. The most superficial reading of the passage would have
allowed candidates to identify the ‘major event’ as a hurricane or more specifically Hurricane Ivan. Question
(c) was based on paragraph 2 which identified ‘laws of physical health’, ‘moral laws’ and ‘environmental
laws’. Candidates variously gave one, two or all three parts in their responses
(a) and (d) were answered by most candidates by directly citing parts of the passage – (a) ‘mankind’s interven￾tions’; (d) ‘The Creator has equipped us with intelligence ... inform ourselves’. While (a) was answered
correctly by most candidates, the reverse was true of (d).
(e) proved to be difficult for many candidates because it required a careful reading of paragraph 3 to work out
the answer rather than just a quotation from the paragraph or a reliance on religious beliefs.
(f) was basically straightforward, but candidates had to identify the ‘object’ precisely (‘hot stove’). Answers
such as ‘hot stove principle’ or ‘stove’ did not get full marks.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
There were several stories of a much higher quality than usual, but the usual weaknesses surfaced in responses
in this section. In the case of Question 4, the picture stimulus, there was the usual problem of concentration on
description of the picture. Yet, there were several good stories given in response. In the case of 5 and 6, there
were too many stories with tenuous connections to the stimulus; and, more generally, there was an inability to
write a short story.
Recommendations for improvement in story writing given elsewhere in this report apply here.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
Performance in this section was much better than in previous years. Candidates seemed to find the topics
familiar and to their liking and therefore produced better arguments. In the case of Question 7, which referred
to “the government”, some candidates took this as an opportunity to attack or defend a political party, accord￾ing to their own political persuasion. In many cases bias prevented candidates from presenting reasoned
arguments. In the case of Question 8 consistency in argument usually provided the critical division between
good and weak answers.
The same recommendations for improvement in argument given elsewhere in this report apply here.
- 10 -
Basic Proficiency
General Comments
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The table below shows the marks assigned to the different papers by profiles.
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Multiple Essay
Choice
Understanding 60 24 84
Expression – 56 56
 TOTAL 60 80 140
There was a slight increase in the number of candidates taking the examination in 2005:
4,502 (2001) ∅ 3,792 (2002) ∅ 3777 (2003) ∅ 3,063 (2004) ∅ 3,504 (2005).
The statistics show a significant increase in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in
2005:– 16.20 % (2003) ∅ 16.78% (2004) ∅ 29.42% (2005).
The performance mean over the last eight years has been up and down, but in 2005 it was better than the three
previous years:-
(1998) 53.13 – (1999) 51.32 – (2000) 56.57 – (2001) 55.08 – (2002) 49.57 – (2003) 47.17 ∅ (2004)
49.62 ∅ (2005) 52.28.
Detailed Comments
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2005 showed an upward change over 2004. The mean score in 2004,
out of a possible 60, was 25.58 and this moved to 27.84 in 2005.
Paper 02 - Free Response
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows:
2004 2005
Section 1 Summary skills (20 marks) 5.06 5.56
Section 2 Comprehension (24 marks) 9.87 9.93
Section 3 Story Writing (16 marks) 5.17 5.14
Section 4 Argument (20 marks) 5.62 6.90
- 11 -
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage written in continuous prose. The level of
interpretation of the candidates who attempted this question was poor. Many of them used their personal
experiences to give meaning to the responses. This was probably because they found the passage too difficult.
Indeed very few candidates gave evidence of a clear understanding of the passage. The weaker candidates
showed complete misunderstanding of the passage and wrote responses which demonstrated incompetence. In
addition most candidates presented responses with just sentence fragments and lack of overall cohesiveness.
They displayed lack of organization of material and their sequencing was poor. Many candidates simply repro￾duced the passage while others in their effort to use their own words exceeded the word limit without including
the main points. The relatively few candidates who were able to identify the relevant points were to some
extent able to give reasonable responses to the question. A few demonstrated ability which was seemingly
above the level of Basic Proficiency. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in
continuous prose as in the model below:
Model Answer
When industrialisation started it was marked by terrible working conditions which would be unacceptable
today. Working hours were based on those of peasants and handicraftsmen, the only workers at the time, and
varied between 12 to 14 hours each day. Many of the workers were children who were among the persons who
could most easily leave agriculture.
Inexperienced workers using machinery exposed themselves to the risk of injury. Protective measures were
introduced and improved, recognising the advances in technologies and the importance placed on human life
and safety.
Advice
It is recommended to teachers that they pay particular attention to concord, tense and sentence structure and
reinforce the skills needed in summary writing. Teachers must be aware that in some cases English needs to be
taught as a second language and so second language approaches need to be adopted if there is to be an improve￾ment in the level of results of these candidates.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage in Standard English. It
assessed their ability to use interpretative and analytical skills. (b) posed the greatest difficulty. Most of the
candidates based their answers on the increase on size of the family instead of stating that there was difficulty
in identifying who was related to whom. Candidates also encountered great difficulty in responding to (e).
As was the case in (b), many failed to score in (e). However, (f) proved to be the easiest and most candidates
were able to give the correct response.
- 12 -
Advice
It is recommended that teachers concentrate on teaching comprehension skills, especially inference, with
particular reference to reading material. Candidates need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set
on the paper, questions requiring precise answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure
that candidates read questions a number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the
whole passage, candidates should also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to
make sure that what they are thinking of writing is what the passage says. Candidates should be advised to re￾read what they have written to make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it.
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a persuasive passage written in Standard
English. Most candidates interpreted (c), (e) and (f) satisfactorily but had difficulty with (a), (b) and (d). The
majority of candidates performed best on question (e). Many were also able to answer (c) and (f) correctly. In
question ‘a’ however many candidates thought that ‘Menu Dining and Entertainment Curacao’ was a restaurant
and focussed on getting food. For (b) the majority of candidates did not focus on the word ‘precisely’ and gave
responses like ‘the Caribbean’, ‘locals’, ‘international people’. The overall performance of the candidates
showed an improvement over former years. Most candidates attempted this question and many of them earned
six marks and more. It was encouraging to see so many candidates recognizing the passage as persuasive
writing.
Advice
It is recommended that teachers reinforce the recognition of the different types of writing. More attention needs
to be paid to identifying relevant information relating to particular questions set on chosen passages. Candi￾dates also need to do much more reading. More attention should be paid to spelling and punctuation.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continuous prose. The most
popular question in this section was question 5, but questions 6 and 4 were done by an appreciable number of
candidates. In response to question 4, many candidates wrote descriptively and ignored several elements of
the story. In question 5, generally the sequence of events resulting in the disappearance of the character was
credible. However, there were several stories which had a tenuous link with the stimulus. In question 6 the
interpretation of ‘surprise’ was limited; the majority created ‘birthday surprises’ or the ‘surprise’ of meeting
their father for the first time. In addition to this, there were many stories in which the link with the stimulus was
weak. There were also a few candidates who fused the three topics into one story. There were a few candidates
who demonstrated superiority and many scripts demonstrated competence. The majority of scripts were of the
level of Range 3 (5-8 marks). There were a few in Range 1 where the candidates showed total inability to write
Standard English. Much work needs to be done in developing candidates’ narrative skills. Similarly, structures
of Standard English need to be taught in a systematic way. In very many cases the lack of competence in
Standard English interfered with the story line.
- 13 -
Advice
It is recommended that candidates be encouraged to read more widely in order to develop a richer vocabulary
and so avoid mundane expressions. They need more practice in writing short stories and in incorporating
dialogue in story writing. They should be given more exposure to figurative interpretations. This can be done
by using model short stories and musical ballads. Candidates should be encouraged to edit their work before
they write the final draft.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
This section tested the candidates’ ability to write persuasively and present sound arguments in continuous
Standard English. In question 7 a few candidates took the word ‘argument’ to mean a confrontation between
two persons and so they wrote a dramatic sketch. Many had difficulty dealing with all parts of the stimulus.
Most of these wrote about ‘getting tough’ and ignored the expulsion component. A few wrote about how
candidates should ‘deal with violence’ when other candidates provoked them. Expulsion was often confused
with suspension. Candidates who performed creditably showed an understanding of a good essay format with
an introduction, a body with well-developed paragraphs and a conclusion. These candidates also made use of
various persuasive techniques such as the rhetorical question, repetition, statistical data, authoritative state￾ments, personal appeal and suitable quotations. Weaker candidates were generally unable to clarify a position
in response to the stimulus beyond stating agreement and disagreement. While most of these candidates were
able to make a few relevant statements there was very little evidence of ability to link and develop these ideas.
Very few used paragraphs. Much of the language used was closer to the vernacular than to Standard English.
Poor spelling made words almost impossible to be recognized: ‘schped behavyer’ for stupid behaviour,
‘armynetions’ for ammunition. Most of these candidates were unable to write clear introductions or relevant
conclusions.
Advice
It is recommended that teachers pay greater attention to subject/verb agreement. Candidates must be encour￾aged to use their dictionaries to improve their spelling and vocabulary. They need more practice in logical
development of argument, use of rhetorical questions and appropriate use of figurative language. It is felt too
that candidates should be encouraged to do research on popular topics based on issues on the radio and the
news-papers. Candidates need to be given many opportunities to write. Debates and discussions provide op￾portunity for candidates to practice expressing opinion. Reading West Indian literature that uses the vernacular
and discussing the difference between this and Standard English can develop the candidates’ ability to distin￾guish between the two. Candidates need more practice in the use of topic sentences and paragraphs.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2006
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2006 Caribbean Examinations Council ®.
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2006
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
The examination in 2006 was the first year the revised syllabus was assessed. Paper 01, the multiple choice
paper, tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper,
tested the Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and
persuasive writing. In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story writing and
description. The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two
papers is as follows:-
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
 Multiple Essay
 Choice
Understanding 60*46+ 40*30+ 76+ = 40%
Expression – 90*114+ 114+ = 60%
* raw score
+ weighted mark
The statistics this year have to be read more carefully because of the changes in the marks allotted and the
changes in the weighting in Paper 02.
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows:
——— ——— ——— ———
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 125) for 2003-2005 and (out of a total of 190*)
for 2006 is as follows:
(2003)50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (2006) 41.51
Average performance over the last four years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks
is as follows:
——— ——— ——— ———
2005
52.70
2006
48.54
2004
49.60
2003
49.53
2005
33.67
2006
32.36
2004
33.09
2003
34.63
- 3 -
Average performance (2003-2005) in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is given below.
Average performance in 2006 is given out of 25 for comparison with previous years and also out of the
relevant 2006 totals.
2003 2004 2005 2006
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 8.66/10.40 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 10.85/12.15 (28)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description 8.84 8.79 9.70 10.22/14.31 (35)
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 9.75/13.65 (35)
There was improvement in performance in Section 2 (Comprehension) and Section 3 (Story Writing/
Description).
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in
all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently
used ones such as colons, semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas,
upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
Students should come to the exam with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question, that is, identifying
the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy, producing a fair copy. This is especially important in
writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers
should advise each student, based on the student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough
copy to a fair copy under CXC examination conditions. Teachers should give students specific instructions
about deleting and editing in order that markers can read and understand what the candidate intended without
undue difficulty.
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced verbatim by the candidate, CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates.
Some of the better candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings
or insert extraneous material. This is penalised. Therefore, those candidates who are seeking to achieve full
marks or high marks should make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked.
For example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they say ‘give a phrase’; at other times
still they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give.
Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as the passages on which the questions
are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to
- 4 -
a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy,
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking in this case, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in
others. Every candidate doing this examination should have read the best story from preceding years in order
to get a sense of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC). These stories, however,
should not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. Although the question paper states word
limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the better students tend to write stories that fall
within or not too far out of the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be
rambling, out of control and weak. Often too, students who write excessively long stories have insufficient
time left to complete the paper properly. Teachers are encouraged to help their students to plan their stories,
focus on building plots, intensifying conflict, creating a good sense of character, instead of merely relating
one or a string of events. Candidates should not memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating
escapes the attention of the examiners.
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and presentation
of sound points, supported by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure
they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that corroborate their points and be
consistent and clear in their presentation. For some inexplicable reason, some candidates operate on the
assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not,
they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as
to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than
if they merely agree with what they think is the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read a passage taken from a newsletter and to summarise in no more
than 120 words the major factors which contribute to the disadvantages encountered by women in the labour
market . Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose.
According to the passage, the major factors contributing to disadvantages are:
• limited access to stable and well paid employment
• inability to pay for public education/training
• inability to qualify for entry to training
• choice of ‘feminine’ and non-technical fields in training
• socio-cultural factors in the attitudes of key people
• private sector training that possibly reinforces gender roles and biases.
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ
but still give the critical information needed:
- 5 -
(1) Many factors contribute to the disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market. Women have
limited access to stable, well-paid employment and are confined to ‘feminine’ work. In vocational
courses women opt for less technical fields which narrow their opportunities. Women are also faced
with the attitudes of employers and society itself when they seek employment. This is due to socio￾cultural factors. In poor countries, women are disadvantaged in secondary or tertiary education
because of entrance requirements or the cost of courses. Although numerous programmes are put in
place by non-governmental organizations, they do not look at the impact of this training due to lack of
monitoring and reporting. Such programmes may reinforce existing gender roles and biases. [118
words]
(2) Though women have increasing opportunity to earn income, they are still disadvantaged economically,
being mostly restricted to low-level, low-paying jobs. Contributing factors include low female enrolment
in the technical-vocational areas that pay well. Females make some poor choices in areas of study
because of their own values. They are influenced by other negative social attitudes towards various
areas of employment. Another factor is that the school system does not help already disadvantaged
girls to reach the entry requirements for technical training nor can they pay the high costs. Informal
training is provided by private companies, but the quality of this training is not monitored, and it may
only serve to maintain a negative situation. [114 words]
(3) The main factors that contribute to the disadvantages found by women in the world of work are
educational and social. In relation to formal education and training, many women in most parts of the
world cannot afford or do not qualify for entry to post-primary institutions. Those who do often
restrict themselves to non-technical “feminine” subjects. This practice is reinforced by society and
helps to limit the women in their job choices. Non-formal training is available in private institutions,
but the courses in these situations are inadequately monitored and might reinforce the negative attitudes
and gender issues that are already contributing to the disadvantages faced by these women in the
arena of work. [113 words]
Performance on Question 1 this year was just marginally below last year’s. There are still too many presumably
genuine attempts which pay absolutely no attention to the word limit given. Some candidates operate with the
casual assumption that excess will be overlooked in all answers. This absolutely does not apply to Question
1. As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage of varying lengths verbatim, or paraphrased them
indiscriminately. Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without
any injection of extraneous material, that is, material not found in the passage.
Advice
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should:
(i) remind students to observe the stated length.
(ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that
students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical.
(iii) help students to recognise the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills
(comprehension and composition skills)
(iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:-
a) using one’s own words as far as possible
b) using plain English with clarity and conciseness
- 6 -
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and situation/
context
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading
e) observing correct mechanics of the language
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is
expected that students have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some questions
require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, students should know how to select word or phrases (as
required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question asks: if it requires ‘a
word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an indication that the student
does not know exactly what the answer is. This is a recurrent problem which is likely to be the kind that would
respond to more oral and written practice in class with immediate feedback and discussion.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Michael Anthony’s “Pita of the Deep Blue Sea”. The following were deemed to be the correct
answers:
(a) Pita/the fish
(b) fast moving action; suspense; tension
(c) panic; anxiety; frustration; desperation
(d) to show the tremendous effort being made to escape
(e) the net
(f) because that is where the fate of the fish was decided, where death took place
(g) he was now free
(h) it was the sound of the place where he would have died
(a) This question was answered correctly by most candidates. The initial difficulty which candidates had
to overcome was that the fish was given a name. Where candidates did not come to terms with this, the
passage as a whole was not well understood.
(b) This question was not answered correctly by most candidates. It is the type of question which reflects
the level of instruction candidates received, since it deals with a writer’s craft.
(c) This question did not present great difficulty to most candidates. However, some candidates answered
the question with words that were extreme or too vague.
(d) It was not satisfactory to make a general statement, that is, that ‘repeat’ means ‘emphasis’. Candidates
needed to explain this specific situation. Candidates had to demonstrate that they understood the
passage.
- 7 -
(e) As in (a), candidates had to interpret the element of personification/animation correctly. Many candidates
were unable to do this.
(f) Some candidates interpreted ‘fateful’ as “faithful’.
(g) This question did not present great difficulty to most candidates.
(h) This proved a difficult question for most candidates. Candidates needed to formulate their answers
based on an understanding of the whole passage.
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward in an article extracted
from Time magazine. The following were deemed to be the correct answers:
(a) The debate is ‘Can people be overweight but still healthy?’
(b) The phrase suggests that most people are involved in the debate or that the debate is worldwide.
Alternatively, the phrase gives weight to the issue or shows the importance of it.
(c) The impression that the writer wants to convey is that people take sides or that people hold
strongly to particular views or that there are conflicting views.
(d) The writer uses the word ‘however’ to point out that other persons hold a contrasting view.
(e) The most important point in the last paragraph is that fitness and size are equally important.
(f) Two factors are people should eat well and people should exercise regularly.
(g) [As a result of confusion about the numbering of paragraphs, this question was removed from
the examination and not marked]
(h) The writer is referring to fitness proponents.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) As usual, the word ‘effect’ was beyond the competence of the majority of candidates.
(c) In this case, the word ‘impression’ did not constitute any major difficulty. Most candidates were able
to formulate satisfactory answers to this question.
(d) Most candidates understood that ‘however’ introduced a contrast and were able to formulate a correct
answer.
(e) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(f) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(h) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
- 8 -
Advice
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond literal interpretations. In the
explanation of literary devices and specific phrases/sentences used by writers, candidates have to be accurate
and precise in their answers. Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which
rarely conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterisation, good and effective use of details to create
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving like
reports, with weak language. There were several students who attempted to use words and structures with
which they were not familiar. The result was that what they wrote was often verbose, sometimes unintelligible
in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the simplicity of
language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling based, for
instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting class productions
– for listening, writing and peer interaction.
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked
appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must be
linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive
interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. Choice of features
to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. Description,
even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.)
must be clearly established. If characters are being described, they must be sufficiently developed. Dialogue,
when used, should be functional (e.g. to develop character, atmosphere, mood, etc.) There should be varied
and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create characters,
moods, tones, atmosphere and setting.
A specific problem which arose this year is that a vast number of candidates did not seem to be aware of the
change made to Section 3, which now asked for a description in Question 6. Since this may not have been the
fault of the candidates themselves and it is possible that in spite of the long lead time given they were not
informed and prepared by their teachers, it was decided not to penalise candidates who wrote a story in answer
to Question 6. This concession will not be repeated next year.
There were not many problems with Question 4. It produced a range of responses with several that were
mainly descriptions. However, most candidates were able to integrate the picture into a story. Most candidates
wrote stories with a theme of a lost son or daughter. Several stories described the old woman, her condition
and circumstances and then developed the plot.
Question 5 was a popular choice, but it produced a preponderance of mediocre stories with hardly any superior
writing. It encouraged candidates to create humour which sometimes was not more than simplistic. Many
responses to Question 5 merely had the stimulus quotation tacked on and not satisfactorily integrated into the
plot.
In the case of Question 6, a great number of candidates proceeded to write a response without reading the
instructions carefully. In the relevant responses to this question, various situations were created – a person
returning home from abroad, a person returning after many years, a person coming to the scene after a disaster
and many others. The good responses to this question used details to create pictures of the environment, made
comparisons or reflections that justified the comment “... she felt like she was in another country” and expressed
- 9 -
thoughts and feelings suited to the situation. Although the question itself assisted with what should be described
– “what she saw and her thoughts and feelings”, many students did not follow the instructions of the question.
Advice
Use more and varied pictures to help stimulate and guide writing. This would help to stimulate classroom
writing e.g. help students focus on use of details to create character, emotion, atmosphere, etc. The creation of
humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing classes – how to tell a joke,
how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story-writing that might interest even reluctant
writers. How to use language effectively to do all this e.g. use of short sentences and exclamation marks for
effect could be a natural way of calling attention to form.
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. A lot more
story reading in preference to talking about story-writing elements. Candidates whose stories are impressive
are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Training in short story writing
must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
A majority of the candidates chose Question 8, while Question 7 was challenging for many who did it. In
relation to the former, some candidates lambasted the Minister of Education instead of taking a stance, giving
solid and strong arguments, expanding the arguments, sustaining a position and employing argumentative
techniques. In relation to Question 7, too many responses lacked substance and information from which
candidates could argue. Those who performed well on this topic most likely had the advantage of knowledge
from Social Studies and were current with topical issues such as C(aribbean) S(ingle) M(arket) and E(conomy).
Unfortunately, many candidates had no knowledge of Caricom as a regional institution and thus could not
argue about what the ‘movement of skilled professionals’ could mean for the region.
In general, candidates who displayed superiority understood the demands of the topic, identified their audience,
cogently presented their points and argued effectively using appropriate devices. Competent candidates
demonstrated some ability to raise points, but faltered on argumentation. Weak responses came from candidates
who had little or only vague knowledge of the topic and lacked the skills of argumentation.
Advice
Students need to be guided about the difference between ‘arguing’ and ‘quarrelling’. Students should be
warned against making unsubstantiated, partisan political statements in an essay that requires logical arguments
illustrated with relevant examples.
Basic Proficiency
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Understanding and Expression) across the two papers is as
follows:-
- 10 -
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
 Multiple Essay
 Choice
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression – 65 65 = 40%
There was a decrease in the number of candidates taking the examination in 2006:
4,502(2001) 3,792(2002) 3,777 (2003) 3,063 (2004) 3,063 (2005) 3,089 (2006).
There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2006:
16.20%(2003) 16.78%(2004) 29.42%(2005) 26.51%(2006).
The performance mean over the last nine years has been up and down, but in 2006 it was better than most of
the previous years:
(1998) 53.13 – (1999) 51.32 – (2000) 56.57 – (2001) 55.08 – (2002) 49.57 – (2003) 47.17 (2004) 49.62 (2005)
52.28 (2006) 56.13 [actually 60.14 out of 150].
Not enough students are demonstrating competence in Profile II (expression). Students seem oblivious to
spelling rules and their spelling is particularly weak and increasingly phonetic. The concept of paragraphing is
ignored and, generally, punctuation is limited to full stops and commas.
There is increasing evidence that some candidates are short of ideas or material. For instance, some candidates
used the passage in Question 1 as a response to Question 7 or in support of the moot in Question 8 and some
candidates used Question 2 as material to answer Section III.
Detailed Comments
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2006 showed an upward change over 2005. The mean score in 2005,
out of a possible 60, was 27.84 and this moved to 28.14 in 2006.
- 11 -
Paper 02 - Free Response
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows:
2004 2005 2006
Section 1 Summary skills (20 marks) 5.06 5.56 4.78/7.17 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension (24 marks) 9.87 9.93 10.99/12.36 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description (16 marks) 5.17 5.14 5.32/6.65 (20)
Section 4 Argument (20 marks) 5.62 6.9 6.90/8.62 (25)
* Under 2006 the mark given first is for purposes of comparison with previous years and the second mark
given is the actual average of out the 2006 totals for each section.
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression)
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage written in continuous prose taken from the
San Juan Star newspaper. The passage examined the link between media violence and children’s behaviour.
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ
but still give the critical information needed:
1. Studies show that violence in the electronic media is linked to violence in society. Children exposed to
such violence may imitate the acts and the actors who commit them. Consequently, their minds are
becoming seriously affected as they begin to see life as an exciting game, not as reality. Parents do not
always fully understand how damaging these violent acts are. Parents, therefore, should be more
attentive to these shows and discuss them with their children. [76 words]
2. Studies show a link between children’s behaviours and the violence and aggression they are exposed
to via television, movies and video games. These studies are important because, to deal effectively
with the problem, we have to understand it thoroughly. Constant exposure to violence and aggression
causes children to imitate these behaviours and view them as normal – even exciting! Parents don’t
realize how awful some video games are. They need to be more vigilant and talk to their children,
many of whom see life as a game. Some don’t even know what is real and what is not. [97 words]
3. Studies show a link between children’s behaviours and the violence and aggression they are exposed
to via audio-visual and interactive media. This exposure causes children to admire and imitate acts of
aggression and violence. In fact, it makes them see life as a game and some cannot tell the difference
between fantasy and reality. Parents and adults do not realise how awful video games are. They need
to be more aware and discuss the negative content with their children. We need to understand the
problem thoroughly so that we can deal with it effectively. [94 words]
Too many students exceeded the word limit. Too many students were unable to use their own words in their
attempt to summarise the passage. Many merely lifted parts of the passage and combined these to form a
summary. A few candidates responded to the topic at an emotional level and were very forthright in expressing
their views. The result was more an argument than a summary and therefore provided no basis for assessment
of summary skills.
- 12 -
Advice
Exercises in summary writing should include passages that are contentious in their subject matter. In such
cases, students should be taught to remain calm in the face of arguments they do not agree with and to summarise
the argument given rather than to respond to it.
In order to help students express themselves logically and concisely, teachers should provide students with
ample exercises in making construction shifts and in recognising and writing equivalent sentences. Students
should be encouraged to constantly review the collective nouns they have learnt from primary school and to
enrich their vocabulary by regular reading of good literature. One way of doing this would be to have a
classroom book club.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage written in Standard English
taken from Nailah Folami Imoja’s Pick of the Crop. It assessed their ability to use interpretative and analytical
skills. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions asked:
(a) Leroi had to stay humble because his mother reprimanded him if he wasn’t.
(b) Ma regarded him as his own man; she stopped sitting by the door; she stopped waiting up for
him when he went out.
(c) Her reward was that he could stay at home for as long as he chose.
(d) Ma lay in bed awake at night because she was waiting for Leroi to come home.
(e) The phrase tells us that he was respectful towards his mother and didn’t want to offend her.
(f) Her opinion was that he was a good boy – he wouldn’t curse for her to hear.
The overall performance on this question was encouraging. Students performed well on questions which
required a grasp of explicit statements made in the passage (a, b, c, d), but showed some difficulty with
questions which required them to draw conclusions or make inferences (e, f) about opinions and attitudes.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(c) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(d) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(e) Many candidates had difficulty understanding and explaining ‘attitude’.
(f) Many candidates had difficulty formulating a response to the question of ‘opinion of’.
- 13 -
Advice
It is recommended that teachers concentrate on teaching comprehension skills, especially inference, with
particular reference to reading material. Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set
on the paper, questions requiring precise answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure
that students read questions a number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the
whole passage, students should also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to
make sure that what they are thinking of writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re￾read what they have written to make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it.
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand an argumentative passage written in Standard
English published in The Barbados Advocate newspaper. The following were deemed to be the correct answers
to the questions asked:
(a) The writer makes the comment because of the variety and quantity of cell phones available
and abused in public.
(b) The writer’s view of such people is that they are inconsiderate.
(c) The writer’s opinion is that people use cell phones in public to show off.
(d) The writer makes the comment because nowadays everybody has a cell phone.
(e) He refers to them as culprits because their cell phones rang at inappropriate moments and
they answered them.
(f) Two developments the writer is predicting are that new annoying traits will emerge and that
the situation will get even worse.
(g) The effect that the writer expects it to have is to cause the person not to use the cell phone
inappropriately in public.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(c) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(d) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(e) The word ‘culprit’ was not generally understood. Many answers failed to mention the idea of
‘inappropriate moments’.
(f) This proved a little more difficult than the first four because the answer was not restricted to one
sentence.
(g) Many answers did not deal with the writer’s expectation or intention.
- 14 -
Advice
In order to master this section, students should be given practice in being specific when answering questions.
There is no need to write an answer of half a page for a question that is worth two marks. Various strategies
should be employed to develop analytical skills in order to answer question which require more than just
quoting from the passage. Teachers need to get students to understand what is meant by the writer’s expectation,
intention, opinion and attitude and to realise that responses of this type require more than quoting from the
passage, they require summarising and explanation.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continuous prose. Instead of all
of the questions requiring a story, this year this section included a question (Question 5) which tested candidates’
ability to write a descriptive essay.
Question 6 was the most popular choice. In Question 4 many candidates simply described the picture while
others wrote stories which had a tenuous link with the picture. Question 5 posed the greatest challenge with
respect to interpretation. In several ‘descriptions’ ‘Al’ appeared only at the end, while in others he was nowhere
in the scene.
An appreciable number of students demonstrated competence in employing all the elements of story writing:
strong plots, good use of imagination, well-rounded characterization, appropriate resolution of conflict,
satisfactory conclusion of action, skilful selection of details and effective use of dialogue. There were a few
superior scripts. However, the majority of students continue to find this section a major challenge and some do
not even attempt any of the three questions. Weak responses included unimaginative ‘stories’ which were a
mere relation of loosely connected incidents. Other weaknesses included the following:
• Shift in perspective from first to third person and vice versa.
• Lack of or inadequate characterization
• Sudden appearance of characters; change of main character
• Underdeveloped stories
• Restricted vocabulary, faulty syntax and weak mechanics
• Stories far in excess of or below the suggested word limit.
Advice
Students should be provided with copious models of good short stories and should be taught the elements of
story writing in a systematic way. After this they should be given regular practice in writing short stories using
various stimuli. Students should be encouraged to read more widely in order to develop a more varied vocabulary.
They should be given more exposure to figurative expressions. They need more practice in incorporating
dialogue in story writing. Students should be encouraged to edit their work before they write the final draft.
- 15 -
SECTION FOUR(Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on a given topic while Question 8 required them to
defend a position.
Candidates seemed to have no particular difficulty relating to the topics given. Generally the supporting
details were pertinent to the topics. For example, candidates showed a clear understanding of the academic
underachievement of Caribbean male youth (Question 7) as well as an awareness of the sometimes harsh
realities of parenting (Question 8). Responses to Question 8, which was the more frequently answered question,
focussed on either the negative socio-economic challenges of having more than two children or the sanction
from God to “be fruitful and multiply”. Because both Question 7 and Question 8 were in two parts, in responding,
some candidates lost sight of the full argument and addressed only one part of the issue.
Weak responses ignored the use of punctuation and/or paragraphing, listed points rather than explain, expand
or illustrate them, did not adhere to logical sequencing and used transitional words and phrases inappropriately.
Some otherwise competent responses included slang words and expressions and MSN (computer) spellings.
Advice
Teachers are encouraged to continue to provide classroom activities for students to practice persuasive skills
orally. They should encourage students to ‘translate’ popular slang expressions and should use ‘teachable
moments’ to underscore the concept of appropriate use of language. They should also reinforce the conventions
of writing Standard English. Interesting newspaper editorials could be used for class discussions. This would
also help to develop students’ analytical thinking and ability to respond concisely to higher order questions
posed in Section 2. Students need more practice in logical development of argument, use of rhetorical questions
and appropriate use of figurative language. Students need to be given many opportunities to write. Students
need more practice in the use of topic sentences and paragraphs. Students would benefit from timed practice
exercises in preparation for the examination.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE 
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS 
MAY/JUNE 2007 
ENGLISH A 
Copyright © 2007 Caribbean Examinations Council ® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
- 2 -
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS 
MAY/JUNE 2007
GENERAL COMMENTS 
General Proficiency
The examination in 2007 was the second year for the revised syllabus. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, 
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the 
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and 
persuasive writing. In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story writing and 
description. The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two 
papers is as follows:- 
 
Paper 01 
Multiple Choice
Paper 02 
Essay
Total
Understanding 60* = 46 + 40* = 30 + 76 + = 40%
Expression - 90* = 114+ 114 + = 60%
Total 46 + 144 + 190 + = 100%
 * raw score 
 + computed score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows: 
 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
 49.53 49.60 52.70 50.96 49.01 
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 125) for 2003-2005 and (out of a total of 190*) 
for 2006 and 2007 is as follows: 
(2003) 50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (2006) 79.14 (2007) 77.94 
 Average performance over the last five years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
 34.63 33.09 33.67 32.36 30.55 
Average performance (2003-2005) in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is given 
below. Average performance in 2006 and 2007 is given out of the relevant totals. 
- 3 -
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 10.40 (30) 10.04 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 12.58 (28) 15.45 (29)
Section 3 Story Writing 
Description 
8.84 8.79 9.70 14.31 (35) 13.62 (35) 
 10.63 (35)
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 13.65 (35) 13.74 (35)
General advice 
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language 
examination and that candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and productive (expression), in the English language. In the examination, 
these skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and 
commas, but also the not so frequently used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other 
conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of 
numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The 
kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages and text messaging is not acceptable in 
this examination. 
Students should come to the examination with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question. In 
accordance with the concept of writing as a process (abbreviated under examination conditions), candidates 
should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a 
rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, in doing a 
description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each student, 
based on the student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy under 
CXC examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting and editing so that the appearance of their 
work is not off-putting to examiners. Though examiners have to make a great effort to decipher every word 
that some candidates have written, candidates should never forget that it is their own responsibility to write 
legibly. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed the 
public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one’s ability 
to perform in the world of work. Consequently, it is not advantageous to treat English language as merely an 
academic subject or as a subject for “nerds”. 
Specific advice on the sections of Paper 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers are 
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use 
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters, policemen and 
CEOs reporting to their board of directors) and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings or 
- 4 -
insert extraneous material. This is penalised. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt to 
mislead or deceive or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. So, those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
In assessing Question 1, the examiners (keeping in mind the specified word limit) pay specific attention to 
the candidate’s ability to use his/her own language, the accuracy and coverage of the major points and the 
ability to connect the main points to make the answer read smoothly. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, 
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates’ responsibility to 
indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of 
possibilities given by the candidate. 
This section requires candidates to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that they have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some questions 
require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, candidates should know how to select word or phrases 
(as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also candidates need to do as the question asks: if it 
requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong - it is an indication 
that the candidates does not know exactly what the answer is. 
 In the preparation for Section 3 every candidate should have read the best story from preceding years in
order to get a sense of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC.) These stories should 
not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not memorise 
published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
 Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better candidates tend to write stories that fall within or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that stretch 
into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create 
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving 
like reports, with weak language. Candidates should try to improve their own techniques of story writing, 
including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good stories written 
by Caribbean authors.
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes 
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the 
simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling 
based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting 
class productions - for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Since the descriptive essay is a new option in this section, greater attention should be paid to it. Description 
must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked appropriately). 
Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must be linked 
appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive 
interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. Choice of 
features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. 
Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, 
mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of language to create 
- 5 -
picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and setting. 
- 6 -
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Candidates should pay attention to ‘tone’ and 
‘audience’ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Candidates 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspapers as well as 
short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some 
unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must 
agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, 
that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiners’ view. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
General Proficiency 
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
Question 1 
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from a popular magazine 
dealing with the history and significance of tattoos and other forms of body markings over the centuries. 
Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose in no more than 120 
words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
• Tattoos are permanent markings which have been around from the beginning of civilization. 
• They were brought to the Caribbean from Africa, China and India, but the Amerindians wore them 
even before. 
• They were used by people in the Caribbean for religious, ethnic and cultural purposes. 
• Over the years they came to be personal expressions identified with rebellion and deviance. 
• Attitudes have changed towards tattoos and today they have become acceptable as marks of 
uniqueness and difference. 
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
(1) From the beginning of civilization tattoos and other body markings have been marks of 
identification, spiritual protection and decoration. Tattoos are permanent markings which vary 
greatly and can be personally very revealing. A tattoo is an instant of your life etched forever on you 
for the world to see. 
 Tattoos and other body markings were characteristic of the Amerindians of the Caribbean as well as 
of the Africans, Chinese and Indians who came here. For all these people, they had cultural, 
spiritual and ethnic significance. Over the centuries, tattoos and other body markings have changed 
back and forth from group significance to individual significance, presenting a daily image of 
difference and uniqueness. (112 words) 
(2) Tattoos have been around from the beginning of time and were used originally as identification marks, 
spiritual protection and decoration, but now they are a popular form of self expression. Tattoos are 
permanent markings on the body which were brought to the Caribbean by slaves from Africa and 
indentured labourers from China and India, but were also used earlier by Amerindians. 
- 7 -
 Over the years tattoos have changed from being positive to negative, often being confused with 
rebellion and deviance (non-conformity). Today, tattoos are once again seen as something positive: 
they are worn by people from all walks of life, on all parts of their body, saying to the world it's all 
right to be different. (115 words) 
 (3) Tattoos have been around from the earliest of times for identification as well as for spiritual and 
decorative purposes. They are more unique and permanent than other symbols and ornaments and 
can be seen by everyone. 
 Tattoos and other body markings came to the Caribbean from Africa, China and India with slaves 
and indentured workers. Indigenous people also used tattoos for spiritual, cultural and personal 
reasons and to indicate social status. 
 Over time, tattoos displayed more personal expressions and were perceived by some to display anti￾social or deviant behaviour. Today, however, tattoos have re-emerged as signs of personal 
expression, have gained respectability and are linked with cultural and social identity and 
individuality and not merely with style. (116 words) 
Performance on Question 1 this year was about the same as last year, revealing the same strengths and 
weaknesses in candidates’ answers. There were too many candidates who did not observe the word limit 
given. Among these, some seemed to operate with the casual assumption that excess would be overlooked in 
all answers, while a few attempted to deceive the examiners by putting an incorrect number of words at the 
end of their answer. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim or paraphrased them 
indiscriminately. Candidates who approached summary writing as a deletion exercise often ended up having 
sentences or pieces of sentences which were improperly connected to what preceded, were inaccurate or 
incoherent. This was especially so in relation to paragraph three, which dealt with the different ethnic 
groups. 
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to bring different sentences and paragraphs together by the use of 
appropriate connectives and to cover all the main points. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
(i) remind students to observe the stated length. 
(ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that 
students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
(iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills 
(comprehension and composition skills) 
(iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
 a) using one’s own words as far as possible 
 b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
 c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
 d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
 e) observing correct mechanics of the language 
- 8 -
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
Performance in this section improved over last year with many candidates getting full or nearly full marks. 
There were no specific questions that candidates found particularly difficult, except for 2 (f). There were still 
a number of candidates who found it difficult to answer the question and stop, but felt the need to go on to 
write paragraph-long answers. 
Question 2 
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage taken from Noel Woodroffe’s 
Wing’s Way . The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set: 
(a) Dawn; Midday; Evening 
(b) fish/ nets; cooking; oil 
(c) the flares of the oil refinery 
a huge red ball (1 mark) 
(d) (the kind of death) found in the eyes of broken, old men 
 (the kind of death) found on abandoned coasts ... 
 the hopelessness of this backwater village 
(e) climbed 
(f) An answer which suggested struggle and difficulty 
(g) The weight of the cars on the sun-softened pitch 
(h) backwater village; missed and ignored; hopelessness of this backwater; swept clean of talent and 
vitality; dependent upon a stony earth and dwindling oil; vision of a hopeless future. 
Since 2 (f) required candidates to go beyond quoting from the passage and to construct the answer based on 
an understanding of the passage, this question was generally not well done. In many cases, it was clear that 
candidates were unable to follow the thread of meaning (as in the second paragraph of the passage) when 
sentences were beyond a certain length. 
 Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward about the ‘generation 
gap’ in an article extracted from Time magazine. The following were deemed to be the correct answers: 
(a) a large amount 
(b) the child has adult concerns; the child wants a lot of privacy; the child no longer trusts the goodwill 
of parents 
(c) not fixed; not forever; can be reversed; variable 
(d) the child’s brain has matured; the child is capable of more independent judgement 
(e) parents 
(f) (i) their powerful feelings/their social lives/social power 
 (ii) power/opinion of other boys/anxiety about masculinity 
- 9 -
(g) they still need their mothers; even though bigger than her, they have to obey her 
(h) but 
 In response to a question as uncomplicated as 3 (a) for which candidates had to construct an answer using 
their own words, what several candidates wrote was either vague, misleading or inaccurate. This was also 
the case with answers to 3 (c). 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond the literal, to make logical 
judgements and to express these accurately. 
 Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which rarely conceal ignorance. 
 Teachers should bear in mind that, in any one year, more questions like 2 (f) may occur on the examination 
paper and fewer which require direct citation from the passage. The incidence of particular question types 
will vary according to the selections the examiners make to ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers 
should therefore familiarise themselves with this section of the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to 
make sure that they provide practice for students in all the question types specified in the syllabus. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
 Questions 4, 5 and 6 
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a man showed some measure of 
distress. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the dramatic line The phone rang once 
and stopped. It rang again. This was it now. Question 6 required that candidates write a descriptive essay 
asking candidates to describe what some astronauts saw as they landed. 
Question 6 was the least popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 10% of the candidates) and 
also the one least well done on average. Question 5 was the most popular (attempted by 52%) with Question 
4 in between (attempted by 34%). Question 5 produced the best story for 2007. The overall performance on 
this section was not as good as last year. 
Question 4 produced many responses dealing with the Iraq war or with disasters of Muslims/Arabs in 
various parts of the world. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture quite well into the story and 
many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 produced a variety of stories, some very well done and others which paid little attention to the 
significance of This was it now in the rubric. Even though most responses did not capture the idea of a pre￾arranged signal, there was some element of panic or dreaming that allowed for a reasonable interpretation of 
the stimulus. As usual, many responses to this question had the stimulus quotation inserted without 
satisfactory integration into the plot. 
In the case of Question 6, a great number of candidates, as was the case last year, wrote responses without 
reading the instructions carefully. Some of the responses suggest that candidates were unfamiliar with 
description and had had no practice dealing with it. In the relevant responses to this question, some 
candidates wrote about what the astronauts saw while landing on another planet, while others wrote on what 
they saw on returning to Earth. Weaker candidates found difficulty limiting themselves to describing what 
the astronauts saw as they landed and included in their responses a narration of the previous and subsequent 
travels of the astronauts. 
- 10 -
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers should treat Section Three as having two sections - two questions requiring short stories and 
one question requiring a descriptive essay. 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing 
classes - how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story-writing 
that might interest even reluctant writers. How to use language effectively to do all this, for example, use of 
short sentences and exclamation marks for effect could be a natural way of calling attention to form. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. Candidates 
whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. 
Training in short story writing must always stress the process of thinking, drafting, editing and proof 
reading. 
Students should be explicitly made familiar with the difference between narrative and descriptive writing. 
Students should imagine themselves using a camera and describing what they see through the lens as they 
move the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary for teachers to 
get students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking 
adjectives and adverbs, students should be wary about memorising flowery phrases and sticking them willy￾nilly into descriptive essays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus specifically 
on vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and another of 
adverbs and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. Teachers need 
to make these lists cover all the senses - sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
Questions 7 and 8 
Question 7 asked candidates to present an argument for or against the use of cellular phones in school. 
Question 8 asked candidates to express their views on the topic Popular music and dance on display in the 
Caribbean today are corrupting the youth and making them irresponsible . Both these questions were within 
the immediate interest and current knowledge of candidates and candidates did not demonstrate any 
significant difference in preference for the one or the other. Even so, performance in this section this year 
was not significantly higher than last year. 
Question 7 seemed to have been predicted and was practised in many schools throughout the region. This 
resulted in well-rehearsed answers in terms of points given for or against the proposition. The better 
responses to this question displayed good argumentative techniques/rhetorical devices. In addition, they 
anticipated the arguments on the other side and countered them satisfactorily. 
 Responses to Question 8 too often failed to examine and demonstrate the cause/effect relationship between
music/dance and corrupt, indisciplined youth. They merely asserted that music and dance are a corrupting 
force and that the youth of today are corrupt. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
While it is necessary to keep abreast of topics of local interest, students also need to read and discuss in class 
wider or international topics because it is not always that topics close to their immediate and current 
experience will be given in this section. 
- 11 -
Students need constant practice in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by contrast’, ‘accordingly’ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Basic Proficiency 
The examination in 2007 was the second year for the revised syllabus. However, this examination is due to 
be discontinued after next year. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, tested most of the Understanding 
component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the Expression component of the 
syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and persuasive writing. The distribution of 
marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is as follows:- 
Paper 01 
Multiple Choice 
Paper 02 
Essay
Total
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression - 65 65 = 40%
Total 60 102 162 = 100%
The number of candidates taking the examination in 2007 declined significantly when compared with 
previous years: 
 3,473 (2005) → 3,504 (2006) → 2755 (2007). 
 There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2007: 
 29.42% (2005) → 26.51% (2006) → 25.01% (2007). 
The performance mean in 2007 was lower than in 2005 and 2006: 
(2005) 52.28 (=37%) → (2006) 60.14 (= 37%) → (2007) 57.65 (=36%). 
 DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2007 showed a decline when compared with 2005 and 2006. The 
mean score in 2005, out of a possible 60, was 27.84; this moved to 28.14 in 2006 and 27.43 in 2007. 
Paper 02 - Free Response 
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows (The numbers in brackets are 
the maximum totals for the respective questions): 
- 12 -
2004 2005 2006 2007
Section 1 Summary skills 5.06 (20) 5.56 (20) 7.17 (30) 7.35 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 9.87 (24) 9.93 (24) 12.36 (27) 12.93 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/ Description 5.17 (16) 5.14 (16) 6.65 (20) 6.29 (20)/5.20 (20)
Section 4 Argument 5.62 (20) 6.9 (20) 8.62 (25) 6.41 (25)
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
The passage to be summarized, adapted from Lester Brown’s The interdependence of nations, dealt with the 
unemployment crisis in Third World Countries. It appeared to be not only unfamiliar reading material for 
many candidates but also beyond their grasp. For example, many candidates seemed unable to fully 
understand the meaning of expressions such as to bring under the plough, unique situation in historical 
terms, profound implications, political and economic well-being of countries. 
The candidates who demonstrated competence or superiority were able to summarize the passage in 80 
words, as required, without losing either the focus or the content of the original passage. The weaker 
candidates simply lifted sections from the original passage to form a summary. As regards economy of 
expression, in several of the incompetent responses, the original passage was reproduced in a telegraphic 
style through omission of function words and transitional words and phrases, thus producing a string of 
disjointed sentences. Weaker responses also showed evidence of a lack of fundamental skills in summary 
writing. For instance, the listing of countries was quite notably preserved: “ … the densely populated 
countries of Asia, the Middle East, North Africa, Central America and the Andean Region.” 
Advice to teachers 
Students need to be exposed to a variety of reading material including basic magazines produced by 
international organisations on the health and economic conditions of people across the world. Students 
would thus expand and enrich their vocabulary by regular reading of relevant literature. This could be done 
within a classroom book club. 
In order to help students express themselves logically, precisely and concisely, teachers should provide 
students with ample exercises in making construction shifts and writing/recognizing equivalent sentences. 
Routine oral practice in the use of transitional words and phrases would also be useful. 
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
The general performance on this section was commendable to some extent. The fact that students could 
easily relate to the content of both passages resulted in a few of them integrating the content into their short 
stories. 
Question 2 sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage taken from Juliana Magloire’s The 
Sea Hawk. 
Overall, those questions which posed the greatest difficulty were 2 (c) and 2 (g), with 2 (e) proving to be the 
easiest. The stronger candidates had no problem with the questions and offered appropriate and correct 
responses to the majority of them. The weaker candidates had difficulty in interpreting the passage and the 
evidence of this was given in the nature of their responses. For example, in response to 2 (a) (What did Bo 
do for a living? ) candidates gave responses such ‘doctor’, ‘smuggler’, ‘engineer’, ‘lifeguard’ as well as 
other incorrect answers. 
- 13 -
Question 3 sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage on beauty and the beauty industry 
taken from a newspaper magazine. 
The last three questions (e-g) were better handled than the first four. Weaker candidates were unable to 
interpret expressions such as going under the knife and beauty can no longer be considered skin deep in 3 (a) 
and 3 (b) respectively. Many of the weaker candidates quoted large portions of the passage with the hope 
that these would provide the correct answer. 
Advice to teachers 
Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set on the paper, questions requiring precise 
answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure that students read the questions a 
number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the whole passage, students should 
also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to make sure that what they are 
thinking of writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re-read what they have written to 
make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it. A specific area that needs greater focus is getting 
students to recognise inference. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture featuring an old man sitting playing a 
guitar. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which ended with the words I should have known better 
than to rely on someone like that. Question 6 required candidates to describe the experience of someone 
named Chris who was seeing the city for the first time at Christmas. 
The most popular of these questions was Question 4. The least popular was Question 5 and the weakest and 
most inappropriate responses came from those who attempted Question 6. 
 In relation to Question 4 and Question 5, the stronger candidates were able to use lively vocabulary and 
imaginative settings to give better than a pedestrian recounting of incidents. They were able to develop a plot 
adequately, set up interesting conflict situations and have a satisfactory resolution. They made use of well￾selected details, had good characterization and effective use of dialogue. Their stories were credible. 
The weaker candidates demonstrated various degrees of inability to use the elements of short story writing. 
They were unable to organize events and had great difficulty in using language effectively and managing the 
mechanics of grammar. There was usually a tenuous link between stimulus and story; the ending was most 
often forced, with the result that the whole strained one’s credibility. 
In relation to Question 6, most candidates wrote responses with long introductions and focussed very little 
on the description of Chris’ experience. 
Advice to teachers 
 
Some of the weaknesses in this section that need special attention are: 
 
• Grammatical problems (tense, use of pronouns, sentence structure) 
• Mere recounting of events with little or no attempt to make the story come alive through 
development of plot, characterization, appeal to the senses, effective selection of details. 
• Poor paragraphing and ineffective use of dialogue. 
It is recommended therefore that teachers employ all available resources to: 
• teach the elements of story writing systematically; 
• provide students with models of good short stories; 
• analyse good short stories as a classroom activity; 
• clarify for students on an ongoing basis the difference between report writing and story writing; 
- 14 - • provide students with copious practice in writing stories; 
• stimulate a desire among students to read; 
• not to give up on the teaching of the mechanics of writing; 
• monitor more carefully bad handwriting and careless errors such as the pervasive ‘the’ for ‘they’. 
 
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of 
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on the topic Too much feteing and partying in the 
Caribbean today is encouraging idleness and indiscipline . Question 8 required candidates to write an 
argument either supporting or opposing the statement As soon as children reach the age of 18, they should 
leave home, find a job and live independently. 
Question 8 was the preferred one of the two. Although most students who attempted the question clearly had 
views on it, some had difficulty in effectively developing points to support their arguments. There was, 
however, evidence of attempts to expand, show cause and effect and employ persuasive techniques in the 
presentation of the essay. 
The better candidates selected relevant information and developed points clearly in support of the position 
taken. There were instances of logical development and appropriate reinforcement of the argument. Some 
candidates were able to clinch their arguments with an effective conclusion. 
There was a general weakness in expression and mechanics of writing. In weaker scripts there was a mere 
listing of points, under-developed thoughts and limited views. There was also evidence of misuse of 
prepositions, awkward syntax, sentence fragments, run-on sentences and neglect of appropriate punctuation, 
especially question marks. 
Advice to teachers 
Classroom teachers need to emphasize language expression, especially sentence structure, appropriate 
vocabulary, mechanics and organisation of argument. There is also need for more concerted teaching of 
literary devices and techniques of persuasion. This will greatly assist in the coherence of responses, 
sequencing and logical development of argument. In addition, interpretative and organisational skills need to 
be mastered by students. For this to be possible, classroom teachers, especially those whose major was 
English literature rather than language, first need to be actively aware of these skills, master them and use 
effective strategies to get students to acquire the same. 
Teachers are encouraged to continue to provide classroom activities for students to practise persuasive skills 
orally. They should encourage students to ‘translate’ popular slang expressions and should use ‘teachable 
moments’ to underscore the concept of appropriate use of language. Interesting newspaper editorials could 
be used for class discussions. This would also help to develop students’ analytical thinking and ability to 
respond concisely to higher order questions posed in Section 2. Students need more practice in logical 
development of argument, use of rhetorical questions and appropriate use of figurative language. Students 
need to be given many opportunities to write. Students need more practice in the use of topic sentences and 
paragraphs. Students would benefit from timed practice exercises in preparation for the examination. 
Too few students are demonstrating competence in Profile 2 (Expression) simply because they are having 
problems with the mechanics of writing. Students seem oblivious of spelling rules and the need to spell 
correctly. For example, in Section 3 which provided a picture stimulus of an old man playing a guitar, there 
were at least a dozen different spellings of the word ‘guitar’. One noticeable element this year was that many 
students demonstrated competence in the use of quotation marks. Apart from this, punctuation was limited to 
full stops and commas. Paragraphing was ignored this year so often, as it has been in previous years, that one 
begins to wonder whether students ever get enough practice in this aspect of writing. There is therefore a 
constant need to monitor and address these elements of writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK I THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2008 
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2008 Caribbean Examination Council ® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2008 
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency 
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for 24 per cent of the Understanding component of the 
examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the Expression component as 
well as 16 per cent Understanding (all of Section 2 and part of Question 1). In Paper 02 candidates were 
allowed a choice in Section III between story writing and description. 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is a 
follows:- 
PAPER 01
Multiple 
Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression − 90* = 114+
 144+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+ 144+
 190+
 == 100% 
 *raw score +
computed score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR*) 46.41 46.25 41.86
(T&T*) 55.81 52.54 49.56
The performance mean for the examination (out if a total of 190*) for 2006, 2007 and 2008 is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR) 77.87 77.31 74.74
(T&T) 83.44 80.12 78.58
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR) 24.34 23.26 26.24
(T&T) 26.10 24.01 26.98
*ROR – Rest of the Region excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
 T&T – Trinidad and Tobago
-3- 
Average performance (for 2008) in the component section of Paper 02 is given below. 
2008 
Section 1 Summary skills 10.42 (30) (ROR)
8.78 (30) (T&T) 
Section 2 Comprehension 8.84 (30) (ROR) 
12.98 (30) (ROR)
Section 3 Story Writing 
 Description
13.29 (35) (ROR)
14.25 (35) (T&T)
11.23 (35) (ROR)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
Section 4 Argument 12.78 (35) (ROR)
13.13 (35) (T&T)
General advice 
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language 
examination and that candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and production (expression), in the English language. In the examination, 
these skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and 
commas, but also the not so frequently used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other 
conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of 
numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence structure and paragraphing. 
Teachers should try to build on young people‟s love of text messaging and have them convert this kind of 
writing into kind that is acceptable in this examination. 
Students should come to the examination with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question. In 
accordance with the concept of writing as a process (abbreviated under examination conditions), candidates 
should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a 
rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, in doing a 
description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each individual 
student, based on the student‟s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair 
copy under CXC examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting and editing so that the appearance of their 
work is not off-putting to examiners. Even though examiners have to make a great effort to decipher every 
word that some candidates have written, candidates should never forget that it is their own responsibility to 
write legibly. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed that 
public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one‟s ability 
to perform in the world of work. Consequently, it is not advantageous to treat English language as merely 
an academic subject or as a subject for „dorks/nerds‟.
Specific advice on the section of Papers 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organized logically within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers 
are instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates 
to use their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters and 
policemen) and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates. In the case of business students who 
-4- 
may be told that an executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case here –
candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original and words 
that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself and not like a 
chopped-up version of another one. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes changes meanings or 
insert extraneous material. This is penalized. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt 
to mislead or deceived or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. So, those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
In assessing Question 1, the examiners pay specific attention to the specified word limit, the candidates 
ability to use his/her own language, the accuracy and coverage of the major points and the ability to organize 
and connect the main points to make the answer read smoothly. There is evidence to suggest that some 
candidates form Belize did not have a clear idea of what was required to achieve a satisfactory mark in 
Section 1. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, 
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates‟ responsibility to 
indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner‟s responsibility to select it out of a number of 
possibilities given by the candidates. 
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that students have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some 
questions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, students should know how to select word or 
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question asks:
if it requires „a word‟ or „a phrase‟, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an 
indication that the student does not know exactly what the answer is. 
In the preparation for Section 3 every candidates should have read the best story form preceding years in 
order to get a sense of what is required. (These „Best Stories‟ are available from CXC). These stories 
should not be memorized and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not 
memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better students tend to write stories that fall within or not to far outside the word limits. Stories that stretch 
into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create 
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving 
like reports, with weak language. Students should try to improve their own techniques of story writing, 
including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good stories written 
by Caribbean authors. 
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes 
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the 
simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral spontaneous story-telling 
based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting 
class productions – for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (for example, the different components must be 
linked appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets 
-5- 
must be linked appropriately (for example, background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). 
The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. 
Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (for 
example, visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of 
language to create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, 
atmosphere and setting. Although responses to this question have improved over the last three years, there 
are still too many candidates who are writing a story and not paying attention to the instruction given. 
In the case of section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Students should pay attention to „tone‟ and 
„audience‟ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Students 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspaper as well as 
short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some 
unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must 
agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, 
that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiner‟s view.
DETAILED COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Rest of the Region excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
SECTION ONE (Profiles – Understanding and Expression) 
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from an article in a 
magazine dealing with the sea turtles, their habits, threats to them and attempts to conserve them. 
Candidates were expected to organize the information and present it in continuous prose in no more than 120 
words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
 Turtles have been around for a very long time 
 Turtles are capable of living very long lives 
 Their number has been drastically reduced recently 
 They are endangered now because of : 
- man-made treats 
- natural features - beach erosion causing loss of eggs
loss of eggs and hatchlings to predators 
their own low rate of reproduction 
 Conservation is difficult because of the turtles‟ migratory habits
 There is now a more hopeful future since conservation attempts are being made 
 Visiting sanctuaries to observe turtles can be a rich experience. 
Following are two excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
-6- 
(1) There are seven species of turtles, ancient creatures capable of living very long lives. Yet, these 
animals are now endangered. The threats to them are both man-made and natural. Man-made threats 
include pollution, bad fishing practices and coastal development. Natural threats include predators, 
the fact that the animal lays its eggs on beaches and therefore the eggs are vulnerable, beach erosion 
and the turtle‟s own low rate of reproduction. In addition, since the turtles migrate vast distances and 
spend most of their time at sea, conservationists have difficulty in helping with their situation. Some 
attempts are being made, however, including having sanctuaries here in the Caribbean. These 
regional organisation provide the additional service of educating and entertaining visitors. (118 
words) 
(2) Sea turtles, which have been around for a very long time, are now under threat of extinction. Their 
number has decreased drastically over the last ten years because of several threats, man-made and 
natural. Man-made threats include pollution, fishing and coastal development. Natural threats 
include predators and beach erosion. Not only do eggs take a long time to hatch, but they have only a 
slim chance of coming to maturity. There are current attempts being made to conserve turtles, but 
conservation is difficult because turtles migrate long distances, do not reproduce often and nest at 
night. Organisations in the Caribbean have been working in various ways towards increasing their 
survival. Their efforts provide visitors with enriching experiences. (117 words) 
Performance on Question 1 this year was about the same as last year, revealing the same strengths and 
weaknesses in candidates‟ answers. There were still too many candidates who did not observe the word 
limit given. Among these, some seemed to operate with the casual assumption that excess would be 
overlooked in all answers, while a few attempted to deceive the examiners by putting an incorrect number of 
words at the end of their answer. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim. Candidates who 
approached summary writing as a deletion exercise often ended up having sentences or pieces of sentences 
which were improperly connected to what preceded, were inaccurate or incoherent. In most cases, such 
candidates reached the word limit when they were about two thirds in the passage and then they added a 
sentence from the last paragraph or simply disregarded the rest. As in this passage, important points may 
occur at the end and if you do not recognise them, you will lose the writer‟s main intention.
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to cover all the main points, omitting unnecessary details and 
repetitions and using language which demonstrated appropriate word choice. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
i) remind students to observe the stated length.
ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that students 
read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing 
skills(comprehension and composition skills). 
iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using one‟s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
-7- 
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
e) observing correct mechanics of the language. 
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Performance in this section was significantly below last year‟s and this was principally because of 
candidates‟ response to the poem.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of part of the poem “The way we were” by 
Maureen Roberts. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set: 
(a) West Indians 
(b) dollars and cents 
(c) It is reaction of surprise/amusement/disbelief/ sarcasm 
(d) She is confident; she thinks highly of herself; she has a sense of humour 
(e) line 23 
(f) „fingers stiff with fear‟; „vocal cords contracted with the curse of shyness‟
(g) Her attitude is (positive) appreciative, thankful. 
In the case of (a), any reasonable and appropriate alternative was accepted. Most candidates answered (b) 
incorrectly, giving shillings and pence as the answer. Since 2(c) and (d) especially required candidates to go 
beyond quoting from the passage and to make an assessment of the narrator, this question was generally not 
well done. In the case of 2(e), candidates were expected to see the difference between the harsher first part 
of the poem and the more pleasant second part and to identify where the change occurred. Only a small 
number were able to identify the point of change accurately. On the whole, therefore, Question 2 was not 
well done. This may partly be attributable to the fact that the passage was in verse. 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a letter to the editor of The Saturday Voice
newspaper about Carnival. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions asked: 
(a) She does not like it.
(b) You/We cannot; none (because it is a rhetorical question).
(c) Move/barely/swaying to.
(d) To create the impression that beads are overused.
(e) Carnival/the participants in Carnival/the costumes of Carnival
(f) Sand/Sandy colour/ the desert
(g) She uses alliteration, that is , a number of words beginning with „s‟.
(h) July
-8- 
Performance on Question 3 was better than on Question 2. However, a significant percentage of candidates 
lost marks because their answers were not precise enough, as in the case of (g) which required „alliteration‟ 
or some accurate paraphrase. Even though most candidates answered 3(h) correctly, there were some who 
could not get beyond the time of Carnival in their own country. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to grasp implied meanings and not just obvious 
ones, to make summary assessments of characters and to express these accurately. 
Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which really conceal ignorance − any 
answer which provides two or more alternatives in the hope that the examiner will select the correct one will 
automatically be awarded zero marks. 
The incidence of particular question types will vary according to the selections the examiners make to 
ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers should therefore familiarize themselves with all sections of 
the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to make sure that they provide practice for students in all the 
question types specified in the syllabus, including prose and verse. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a woman appeared to be 
screaming. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the sentences The amusing thing is 
that I didn‟t plan it this way. It was just a series of unexpected turns. Question 6 (the descriptive easy) 
required candidates to describe the scene before a match between two high school teams. 
Question 6 was the least popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 26% of the candidates) and 
also the one least well done on average. Question 4 was the most popular (attempted by 39% with Question 
5 in between in terms of the number of candidates who attempted it (35%), but the best done on average. 
Question 4 produced the best story for 2008. The overall performance on this section was about the same as 
last year. 
Question 4 produced a variety of responses. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture quite well 
into the story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 proved to be challenging for many candidates who seemed unable to illustrate a series of 
unexpected turns in their story. As usual, many responses to this question had the stimulus quotation 
inserted without satisfactory integration into the plot. 
In the cases of Question 6, there was marked improvement over last year, indicating that candidates were 
better prepared to write a descriptive essay. However, too many candidates seemed unable to resist the 
temptation to write about the match itself instead of limiting themselves to the scene just before the match. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
Teachers should treat Section Three as having two sections – two question requiring short stories and 
one question requiring a descriptive essay.
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing 
classes – how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of the story-writing 
that might interest even reluctant writers. 
-9- 
Over the years, candidates have used the story lines in films they have seen as the basis for their short 
stories. However, even though originality in story line is not an absolute requirement, candidates should not 
get into the habit of slavishly copying other people‟s material. It is not only illegal but it will also result in 
the copied parts of stories being discredited. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. Candidates 
whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. 
Training in short writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading. 
Students should be explicitly made familiar with the difference between narrative and descriptive. Students 
should imagine themselves using a camera and describing what they see through the lens as they move the 
camera gradually form left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary for teachers to get 
students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking adjectives 
and adverbs, students should be wary about memorizing flowery phrases and sticking them willy-nilly into 
descriptive essays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus specifically on 
vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and another of adverbs 
and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. Teachers need to make 
these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
Question 7 and 8
Question 7 asked candidates to present an argument for or against the idea that Caribbean countries would 
be better served if they had women as prime ministers. Question 8 asked candidates to express their views 
on the topic Planning for the future is a waste of time. Too much of our future is beyond our control. 
Candidates did not demonstrate any significant difference in performance for the one or the other question. 
Performance in this section this year was slightly lower than last year. On average, Question 8 produced 
better answers than Question 7. Most of the good responses to Question 8 outlined the benefits to be derived 
from planning and give illustrative examples. Responses to Question 7 overwhelmingly concentrated on 
traditional concepts of women arguing that such characteristics would make them either good or bad prime 
ministers respectively. Added to this, there was a fairly general assumption (except in the case of Guyanese 
candidates) that prime ministers were all-powerful. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
While this section of the paper often gives topics which are immediate to teenagers, students also need to 
keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interest. It is not always that topics close 
to the immediate and current experience of teenagers will be given in this section. 
Students need constant practise in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, „accordingly‟ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
-10- 
DETAILED COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Trinidad and Tobago
SECTION ONE (Profile – Understanding and Expression) 
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from an article in a 
magazine dealing with ethanol production in America. The topic was chosen because it was seen to be 
topical, even if not local. Candidates were expected to organize the information and present it in continuous 
prose in no more than 120 words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
 Ethanol production has increased tremendously and is still increasing 
 Ethanol seems to offer the USA a chance to become less dependent on imported oil 
 That would free the USA from concerns about oil prices and uncertainty of supply 
 However, a sufficient increase in ethanol production is unlikely because: 
- the land space to produce the corn is unavailable 
- Americans are addicted to cheaper oil 
- ethanol is less cost effective 
- ethanol production and distribution depend on oil 
- expensive basic elements need to be put in place to facilitate ethanol distribution 
Following are two excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
(1) Ethanol production in the USA has increased tremendously and is still increasing. There are 
significant benefits should the USA manage to reduce dependence on foreign oil through the 
production of ethanol. The price of oil would fall significantly; oil producing countries would have less 
power; and the USA would be less worried about fluctuating oil prices and supply. However, 
reduction of dependence on oil is unlikely. One reason is that there is insufficient land to grow the 
volume of corn needed. In addition, America has become addicted to oil which is more cost effective 
than ethanol. Also, ethanol brings problems as its production and distribution depend on the use of oil 
and require infrastructural change. (115 words) 
(2) Ethanol production in the USA has increased dramatically to the point where it exceeds the farmers‟ 
ability to produce the necessary amount of corn. Ethanol could reduce the dependence on foreign oil 
so that the USA would not be subject to fluctuating prices or the threat of interrupted oil supply. The 
price of oil would fall and the power of OPEC reduced. The biggest hindrance is that the USA does not 
have enough land to produce the required amount of corn. Furthermore, production costs are high 
and ethanol itself requires the use of oil in all stages of its production and distribution. In addition, 
since the traditional forms of distribution are unsuitable for ethanol, costly modifications need to be 
made. (120 words)
Performance on Question 1 was below standard, probably because the subject matter was not within the 
immediate interest of many candidates. Since candidates had to read the passage carefully instead of 
depending on their general knowledge of the subject, the exercise proved difficult for many of them. Many 
candidates, probably more so than usual, lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim, without 
understanding them and without properly connecting them. There were still too many candidates who did 
not observe the word limit given. 
-11- 
Suggestion for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
i) remind students to observe the stated length
ii) drill students in the skill of reading paragraphs and identifying the topic 
iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises both comprehension and 
composition skills 
iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using their own words as far as possible 
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) using connectives to achieve fluency 
d) observing correct mechanics of the language.
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Performance in this section was below last year‟s but about the same as that of 2006. On average Question 3 
was done better than Question 2. 
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage taken from Mark McWatt‟s 
Suspended Sentences: Fictions of Atonement. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the 
questions set: 
(a) rain/mud 
(b) He laughed because the idea of reaching Annandale was ridiculous/He laughed because the writer did 
not realize that it was impossible to get to Annandale in the rainy season 
(c) unpleasant/dreary/gloomy 
(d) because he could not get down the river/because he could not get to where he wanted to go 
(e) because it was isolated/because it „seemed to lie … between reality and dream‟
(f) meandered 
(g) the almost opaque curtain of rain 
(h) disgust/frustration 
Since 2(c) and (d) especially required candidates to go beyond quoting from the passage and to make an 
assessment of the narrator, this question was generally not well done. In the case of 2(e), candidates were 
expected to see the difference between the negative first part of the poem and the more pleasant second part 
and to identify where the change occurred. Only a small number were able to identify the point of change. 
-12- 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of an article in the Sunday Sun newspaper 
about „boys on the block‟. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the question asked:
(a) It gives you the topic of the passage/It tells you what the passage is about 
 
(b) Intelligent 
(c) by using a quotation from a magazine/by citing an authority/by giving evidence that it is widespread 
throughout the Caribbean 
(d) underachievers/ the unqualified/slower children 
(e) the failure of education to provide adequate, serious compensatory schooling 
(f) It will become a social cost to all of us/There boys will become liabilities 
(g) The problems must be tackled root and branch systematically and in a sustained manner 
(h) education 
As is usually the case, candidates found those questions which required identification of words from the 
passage easier than those which required a judgement or assessment. In the case of 3(a), instead of stating 
the relevance of the quotation, many candidates simply explained what it meant. A significant number of 
candidates gave the answer „Yes‟ to 3(h) and/or repeated the three alternatives in the question, showing 
clearly that they did not understand a straightforward question structure. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond the literal, to make logical 
judgements and to express these accurately. Teachers should ensure that students understand the structure 
and wording of questions and not assume that they do. Teachers should dissuade students from giving 
answers with several alternatives. Such answers are generally awarded zero marks. 
Teachers should bear in mind that questions which require judgements and assessments will always occur on 
the examination paper, in Question 2 and Question 3, the balance across the two questions differing from 
year to year. The incidence of particular question types varies to make sure that the full syllabus is covered. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a woman appeared to be 
dancing or performing a ritual or reaching for something. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story 
which included the words As my parents sat there discussing me, I could not believe what they were saying. 
This was my life, not theirs. Question 6 (the descriptive essay) required candidates to describe the scene 
from a building as people stared out at the city. Performance on this section was generally better than last 
year and candidates are coming to terms with the requirements of Question 6. 
Question 5 was by far the most popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 75%) and the best done 
on average. Question 6 was the least popular (attempted by 6% of the candidates) and Question 4 did not 
fare much better in terms of the number of candidates who attempted it (14%). The performance on 
Question 4 and 6 was about the same and it was not significantly lower than that on Question 5. 
Question 4 produced a variety of interpretations. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture into the 
story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
-13- 
Question 5 proved to be attractive to many candidates who seemed to be familiar with the situation. As a 
results, the stories were generally interesting and satisfactorily written. 
In the case of Question 6, there was variety in the responses with many candidates choosing a science-fiction 
type of story. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create 
atmosphere, mood and feelings. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, 
drafting, editing and proof reading. 
Students should continue to stress the difference between narrative and descriptive. In the case of the 
descriptive, a good approach is to imagine oneself using a camera and describing what one sees through the 
lens as one moves the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary 
for teachers to get students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrase and sentences with 
striking adjectives and adverbs, students should be wary about memorizing flowery phrases and sticking 
them willy-nilly into descriptive assays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus 
specifically on vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and 
another of adverbs and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. 
Teachers need to make these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
Question 7 and 8
Question 7 asked candidates to support one of two opinions given about who should determine employees‟ 
dress at work. Question 8 asked candidates to express their views on the topic Governments should make it 
compulsory for all householders to take precautions against natural disasters. Candidates demonstrated a 
decided preference for Question 7 over Question 8 but, on average, performance on Question 8 was 
marginally better than Question 7.
Suggestion for teachers and students 
While it is necessary to keep abreast of topics of local interest, students also need to read and discuss in class 
wider or international topics because it is not always that topic close to their immediate and current 
experience will be given in this section. 
Students need constant practice in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, „accordingly‟ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
-14- 
BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency 
The examination in 2008 was the last year for this examination. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, 
accounted for most of the Understanding component of the examination overall and Paper 02, the free 
response paper, accounted for all of the Expression component as well as part of the Understanding (all of 
section 2 and part of Question 1). In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story 
writing and description. 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is a 
follows:- 
PAPER 01
Multiple 
Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression − 65 65 = 40% 
TOTAL 60 102 165 == 100% 
 *raw score +
computed score
The number of candidates taking the examination in 2008 declined significantly when compared with 
previous years: 
Year Candidate entry 
2006 3 089
2007 2 147
2008 1 597
There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2008: 
Year % candidates acquiring 
Grade III and above
2006 26.51
2007 25.01
2008 17.62
Detailed Comments 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Candidates‟ performance in Paper 01 in 2008 was slightly better than in 2007. The mean score in 2006 was 
49 per cent, this moved to 46 per cent in 2007 and 48.35 per cent in 2008. 
-15- 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Candidates‟ performance in Paper 02 in 2008 was lower than in the preceding years. The mean score in 
2006 was 31 per cent; this declined to 29 per cent in 2007 and further declined to 26.07 per cent in 2008. 
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows (The numbers in brackets are 
the maximum totals for the respective questions): 
2006 2007 2008
Section 1 Summary skills 7.17 (30) 7.35 (30) 7.23 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 12.36 (27) 12.93 (27) 11.27 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description 6.65 (20) 6.29 (20) 
5.20 ( 20)
6.76 (20) 
7.14 (20)
Section 4 Argument 8.62 (25) 6.41 (25) 5.56 (25)
SECTION ONE (Profiles – Understanding and Expression) 
The passage to be summarized was adapted from an advertisement in a newspaper for „The Caribbean 
Awards for Excellence‟. It was organized in three sub-sections under the following headings: „Mission‟, 
„the Magnitude of our appreciation‟, „Award categories‟. The layout presented a stout challenge to some 
candidates, many of whom began their summaries with a sentence fragment that was simply a re-statement 
of the Mission Statement, but with no clear linkages. The few candidates who demonstrated competence 
were able to identify the main ideas and write the summary comprehensively. They were able to use 
standard English, organize their ideas sequentially and summarise the passage in 80 words, as required, 
without losing either the focus or the content of the original passage. 
The weaker candidates presented summaries that retained the organization and language of the original 
passage. In such cases it was difficult to assess whether the candidate had meaningfully selected relevant 
details or whether these were stumbled upon by chance. As regards economy of expression, in several of the 
incompetent responses, the original passage was reproduced in a telegraphic style, omitting function words 
and transitional words and phrases and thus producing a string of disjointed sentences. Weaker responses 
also showed evidence of a lack of fundamental skills in summary writing. For example, the three award 
categories were mentioned and subsequently elaborated: “…This includes those who…”
Apart from its layout, the language of the passage also presented difficulties to candidates, who seemed 
unfamiliar with such phrases as „increased visibility‟, „financial component‟, „scale and scope‟, „give 
impetus to‟. Some candidates interpreted the word „candidates‟ as synonymous with „students‟ and 
therefore wrote summaries not about citizens being rewarded for community work, but about students being
rewarded for excellent performance on exams. A number of students also exceeded the word limit by 
rewriting the passage, while others took ideas from different sections and mixed them to form a summary. 
Students‟ responses suggested that they needed more practice in summary writing: it is quite evident that 
they were unable to identify main ideas and paraphrase these ideas. 
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Question 2 and 3
The general performance on this section was below that of previous years. 
Question 2 tested the candidates‟ ability to respond to a passage taken from Earl Lovelace‟s Salt, featuring 
the experiences of a boy. Most students performed well in contextual questions, but produced weaker 
responses in questions which required synthesis and evaluation. For example, in 2(d) “To what does „it‟ 
refer in line 9 of paragraph 1?” Students gave erroneous responses (the sun; the cemetery) and were unable 
-16- 
to correctly identify „the town‟. Question 2(f) and 2(g), particularly the former “(What does the father think 
of the son in paragraph 3?”) also presented difficulties to students.
Question 3 tested the candidates‟ ability to respond to an argumentative passage from a newspaper article 
(„Carnival Survives‟) written by Caspar London. Again, questions which required assessments proved 
difficult. For instance, in 3(e) “What does the author imply by the words „whatever than means‟ in lines 14 
and 15?”, many students missed the sarcasm and responses quite literally that the author did not understand 
the expression. In this question, as in Question 2, many of the weaker candidates quoted large portions of 
the passage with the hope that these would provide the examiners with the correct answer. However, this 
strategy does not work. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
As usual, this section posed a major challenge to the majority of candidates. 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture featuring a man apparently jumping 
through the air or running. Question 5 asked candidate to write a story based on the sentence It was then 
that I remembered my mother‟s words “What you sow is what you reap”. Question 6 provided the words 
The spacecraft blasted off. Mars here we come! and asked candidates to describe the astronaut‟s journey 
and their landing on Mars. The most popular of these questions was Question 5 and the least popular was 
Question 6. Question 5 was satisfactorily interpreted, as was Question 4. In Question 6, students generally 
did not pay attention to key words: describe; journey; landing. 
Some of the weaknesses in this section that need special attention are: 
Grammatical problems (tense, use of pronouns, sentence structure)
Mere recounting of events with little or no attempt to make the story come alive through 
development of plot, characterization, appeal to the senses, effective selection of details. Poor 
paragraphing and ineffective use of dialogue. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
This section tested the candidates‟ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of 
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on the topic There is nothing wrong with 
children being subjected to hardships and being denied privileges in life; it will build character. Question 8 
required candidates to write an argument either supporting or opposing the statement Victims of violent 
crimes should be compensated by the relatives of the criminals. 
A significant percentage of the candidates did not attempt this section. Among those who did, virtually the 
same number did each of the questions, but Question 7 was not as poorly done as Question 8. Candidates 
had problems interpreting some important words and expressions in the topics for example, „privilege‟ and 
„hardship‟ (Q7); „compensate‟ and „victims‟ (Q8). These misinterpretations sometimes rendered their 
arguments invalid. Although most students who attempted the questions clearly had views on the topics, 
some had difficulty in effectively developing points to support their arguments. There was, however, 
evidence of attempts to expand, show cause and effect and employ persuasive techniques in the presentation 
of the essay. 
The better candidates selected relevant information and developed points clearly in support of the position 
taken. There were instances of logical development and appropriate reinforcement of the argument. Some 
candidates were able to clinch their arguments with an effective conclusion. 
There was a general weakness in expression and mechanics of writing. In weaker scripts there was a mere 
listing of points, under-developed thoughts and limited views. There was also evidence of misuse of 
prepositions, awkward syntax, sentence fragment, run-on sentences and neglect of appropriate punctuation, 
especially question marks. 
-17- 
General comments
Not enough students demonstrated competence in Area II (Expression). Poor expression was most obvious 
in Section 3 where students wrote phrases such as: 
It was graduation day and we receive medels for our achievements; 
The senter of my hair was balled 
They need freedom to associate with people to know their upstands and their downfalls 
When you are in your cells you are very board 
I laided on my bed and I decided to fall asleep 
One encouraging fact is that many students demonstrated competence in the use of quotation marks. Apart 
from this, punctuation was limited to full stops and commas. The concepts of paragraphing is ignored so 
often that it prompts the question as to whether this aspect of writing is overlooked by teachers. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
Copyright 2008 Caribbean Examinations Council® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2009 
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for most of the UNDERSTANDING COMPONENT of 
the examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the EXPRESSION 
COMPONENT as well as part of the Understanding (all of Section 2 and part of Question 1). 
 The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is as 
follows:- 
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in the two papers this year, and the three 
previous years is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
48.54 49.01 (RoR*) 41.86 56.44 
 (T&T*) 49.56 
 *Rest of Region 
 *Trinidad and Tobago
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 190*) for 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009 is as 
follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
79.14 77.94 (RoR*) 74.74 81.82 
 (T&T*) 78.58 
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
32.36 23.44 (RoR*) 26.24 27.92 
 (T&T*) 26.98 
PAPER 01
Multiple Choice
PAPER 02
Essay
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+ 40* = 30+ 76+ = 40%
Expression – 90* = 114+ 114+ = 60%
TOTAL 
*raw score
 46+
+ weighted score
144+ 190+ = 100%
* raw score+ computed score
- 3 -
Average performance (2007-2009) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below. 
2007 2008 2009
Section 1 
Summary skills
10.04 (30) 10.42 (30) (RoR)
8.78 (30) (T&T) 
10.69 (30)
Section 2 
Comprehension
15.45 (29) 8.84 (30) (RoR)
12.98 (30) (T&T)
11.13 (30)
Section 3 
Story Writing 
Description
13.62 (35) 
10.63 (35) 
13.29 (35) (RoR)
14.25 (35) (T&T)
11.23 (35) (RoR)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
13.27 (35)
13.30 (35) 
Section 4 
Argument
13.74 (35) 12.78 (35) (RoR)
13.13 (35) (T&T)
14.44 (35)
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that candidates are required to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and productive (expression). In the examination, these skills must be 
demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (full stops, commas, colons and semi￾colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, 
abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence 
structure and paragraphing.
Teachers should try to build on young people‟s love of text messaging and other interactive types of 
communication on the computer (e.g. e-mail, Facebook) to enhance their understanding of skills that are 
required in non-face-to-face communication, and have them adapt these skills to fit the kind of writing 
that is acceptable in this examination. 
No matter how frustrating it may be, teachers must continue to use all their resources to encourage 
students to read because it is only by reading consistently that students will become comfortable with the 
written word. Furthermore, it is only by writing consistently that students will learn to write well. Reading 
(on its own) will not make a child acquire the skills of writing – passive skills (e.g. reading) cannot 
automatically transform themselves into active skills (e.g. writing). 
- 4 -
Candidates should come to the examination with a well practised procedure for tackling each question. 
Candidates should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down 
points, doing a rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, 
in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. It is only through repeated 
practice beforehand that each student will come to some understanding of the best way to process a rough 
copy into a fair copy under examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting, making insertions and making 
additions to their work so that what they write is intelligible to the examiners. Candidates must also 
acquire the habit of numbering answers correctly and setting out their answers on the page in a way that 
the examiners can recognise them. Even though examiners are required to make a great effort to decipher 
every word that some candidates have written and to find all the pieces of an answer, candidates should 
never forget that it is their own responsibility to write their answers legibly and clearly. Unlike the 
situation in school where in most cases one teacher corrects a whole test paper, in the CXC examination 
each answer is corrected by a different examiner. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed 
the public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one‟s 
ability to perform in the world of work. It is almost a sure way to fail the English „A‟ examination by 
starting off believing that you already know English and all that you need is a little practice on one or two 
questions. This becomes even more critical for those who have to repeat the examination after failing to 
perform satisfactorily in it. 
Specific advice on the sections of Paper 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within 
the word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC 
examiners are instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by 
candidates to use their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters 
and policemen) and should be treated as such by teachers and students. In the case of business students 
who may be told that an executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case 
here – candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original and 
words that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself and 
not like a chopped-up version of another one. 
The passage to be summarised is usually taken from a newspaper or magazine which caters to the general 
public. In order to understand the passage, candidates must be familiar with English words and structures 
that educated people use in their general writing. In some cases a few words may not be familiar to a 
reader, but in those cases the reader will very likely be able to work out the meaning from the context. 
Candidates should therefore get into the habit of reading at least the editorial page in their local 
newspaper as well as letters to the editor. In addition, candidates should read one or two articles from 
magazines that cater to their age group: Caribbean magazines and even international magazines for the 
general public. In this way they will become better able to work out, among other things, unfamiliar 
words in context.
- 5 -
The examiners look first of all to see whether the word limit has been exceeded. They stop their reading 
at that point, disregarding all else. The examiners then look to see whether the candidate has understood 
and can clearly identify the main points in the passage and award marks accordingly. The examiners then 
assess whether the candidate has put those points together in an intelligible and logical manner using 
his/her own words and award marks accordingly. 
When candidates exceed the word limit, the marks may be reduced by as much as 20%. 
When candidates use only the words in the original passage, the marks are automatically reduced 
by 33%. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings or 
insert extraneous material. This is penalised. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt 
to mislead or deceive or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. Those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question, candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad 
strategy, one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates‟ 
responsibility to indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner‟s responsibility to select it out 
of a number of possibilities given by the candidate. 
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that candidates have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some 
questions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. Students should know how to select words or 
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question 
asks: if it requires „a word‟ or „a phrase‟, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an 
indication that the candidate does not know exactly what the answer is. 
In the preparation for Section 3, every candidate should have read the best story from preceding years in 
order to get a sense of what is required. (These „Best Stories‟ are available from CXC). These stories 
should not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not 
memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
Cheating is punished severely and can have serious consequences. 
Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better students tend to write stories that fall within or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that 
stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to 
create atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly 
behaving like reports, with weak language. Students should try to improve their own techniques of story 
writing, including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good 
stories written by Caribbean and other authors. 
- 6 -
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with 
the simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story￾telling based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate interesting 
class productions – for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked 
appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must 
be linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The 
interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. 
Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. 
visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of language to 
create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and 
setting. Although responses to this question have improved over the last three years, there are still too 
many candidates who are writing a story and not paying attention to the instructions given. 
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Students should pay attention to „tone‟ and 
„audience‟ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Students 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspapers as well 
as short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For 
some unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that 
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact 
is, however, that the questions are deliberately set to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiners‟ view or what they ought to say.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
Question 1 
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from a magazine 
article dealing with difficulties faced by the sugar industry in the English-speaking Caribbean and 
solutions proposed. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous 
prose in no more than 120 words. 
- 7 -
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:– 
Sugar remained the English-speaking Caribbean‟s premier export crop because of high prices and 
preferential treatment. 
Sugar has now become unviable since prices have declined because large global producers have 
entered the market. 
Sugar is important, however, because of its ecological impact and because it is a part of the life of 
a significant part of the population. 
 Caribbean economies have to change because of the WTO ruling. 
 Change will not be easy because it requires money, modernization and retraining. 
Following are three summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ but still 
give the critical information needed: 
(1) Although many Caribbean states have abandoned sugar, chiefly because of competition from 
bigger producers, it remains the most important export crop in the English-speaking countries 
supported as it is by high prices and preferential trading agreements with the UK and the EC. 
In Jamaica, sugar still provides the livelihood for many in almost every parish and is a major 
foreign exchange earner. It is also environmentally friendly. However, elsewhere price cuts ruled 
by the WTO have led to changes in the importance and nature of the sugar industry, including the 
end of production in some cases. The success of this transition will depend on several factors, 
including European support, investments for modernization and retraining some workers. (116 
words) 
(2) Although cane production was abandoned in some Caribbean countries, the industry has 
flourished in others because of high prices and preferential trading arrangements with Europe. 
In Jamaica, sugar plays a vital part in contributing foreign exchange, in preserving the natural 
environment by preventing soil erosion and in providing a haven for animals. Recently, however, 
some Caribbean sugar industries became less profitable as larger countries started to export 
sugar. In response to this, some Caribbean countries have diversified. Europe’s decision to cut its 
preferred price, as directed by the WTO, has led to new industries being established, but this kind 
of change is difficult since European support is required as well as re-training of personnel to do 
other jobs. (117 words) 
(3) Caribbean economies have to reorganize in response to changes in the market economy for 
sugar. This means modernizing the industry as well as re-training and re-deploying human 
resources into other areas. The situation is partly a result of a WTO ruling against preferential 
conditions offered to the Caribbean by Europe, and partly because of the advent to the market of 
large producers like Brazil and Australia. These factors have made sugar production in the 
region less viable.
Though some countries chose to stop producing sugar, the Caribbean cannot afford to abandon 
the industry entirely not only because significant parts of the population rely on it for a 
livelihood, but also because it is an essential part of the ecological landscape. (120 words) 
- 8 -
Performance on Question 1 this year was marginally better than last year‟s, though revealing the same 
strengths and weaknesses in candidates‟ answers. However, there were still too many candidates who did 
not understand what is required in a summary. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage verbatim, often because they were not quite sure 
of the meaning of a key word. Because the passage used Jamaica to show the continuing importance of 
the sugar industry in some places, some candidates concentrated almost their entire summary on Jamaica. 
Those candidates who tried to summarise by simply following the sequence of the passage (without 
reading the whole passage first and identifying the main points) reached the word limit when they were 
about two thirds in the passage and then simply disregarded the rest. This meant that they automatically 
lost marks for not identifying some of the main points and they lost marks for poor organisation of their 
summary. 
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated excellent comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to identify all the main points, omitting unnecessary details and 
repetitions, and they were able to put together the points in a coherent way, using their own language as 
far as possible . 
Suggestions for teachers and students
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
 (i) remind students to observe the stated length
 (ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done 
(iii) insist that students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
(iv) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills 
(comprehension and composition skills)
 (v) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using one‟s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
e) observing correct mechanics of the language 
- 9 -
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
Performance in this section was similar to last year‟s overall performance.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage from George Lamming‟s “Of 
thorns and thistles”. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set:
(a) She entered on tiptoe; she whispered 
(b) that there is tension; that there is conflict; a dramatic effect; an effect of give and take
(c) Her normal attitude was pleasant and agreeable.
(d) A tense or unpleasant atmosphere existed.
(e) She disapproved of it; she disliked it; it was outrageous and offensive
(f) She prepared herself to receive Rose; she was trying to calm herself; she shut herself off 
determined to ignore Rose; she wanted to appear to be asleep; she assumed a position of protest
(g) She was old and weak
(h) She had difficulty seeing. 
Most candidates found no difficulty answering (a), (e) and (g). In the case of (b), as is usually the case, 
whenever a question asks What effect does ..., there is a sharp separation of weaker students from stronger 
students. In the case of (c), a high percentage of candidates seemed not to be able to contrast the incident 
in the passage from what was „normal‟. It is clear that they expected a clue or the answer to be near the 
beginning of the passage and paid little attention to It was seldom that Angela displeased her, which 
occurred in the last paragraph. In the case of (d), it seemed as if the word atmosphere in this context 
posed a problem for many candidates or that they found difficulty finding an appropriate word to identify 
an atmosphere. (f) was probably the most testing of the questions in that it required candidates to 
formulate a conclusion about Mother Barton‟s posture based on what had happened before. This kind of 
task seemed to be beyond the reach of the majority of the candidates. In the case of (h), too many 
candidates found it difficult to understand that a summary answer was required rather than individual 
answers to each phrase given. 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage taken from a newspaper article 
“Impact of Criminal Aliens” written by Tony Best. The following were deemed to be the correct answers 
to the questions asked: 
(a) Undocumented immigrants and immigrants who commit crimes
(b) It gives the idea of something happening unexpectedly or without ceremony or that it comes as a 
shock. 
(c) It means one is refusing to deal with the problem of the effects on the Caribbean of the 
deportation of immigrants who commit crimes.
- 10 -
(d) It evokes or encourages one to have sympathy or empathy for the position of the United States. 
(e) It suggests that “friends” is not to be taken at face value, that it has another meaning; it is an 
example of sarcasm or irony.
(f) An example is “choirboys are not being shipped to the region”.
(g) Many of the deportees left the region as underage children and were sent back to the Caribbean 
as hardened adult criminals.
(h) He is suggesting that all parties concerned should sit down and work out a reasonable policy.
Performance on Question 3 was below that on Question 2. As is usually the case, answers, such as (a), (g) 
and (h), which are explicitly stated in the passage were answered satisfactorily by most candidates. As 
was the case in Question 2, the phrase What is the effect of ... in (b) posed a great problem for the vast 
majority of the candidates, added to the fact that the word jolted seemed to be unfamiliar to many of 
them. The same was the case in (d) where, in addition to the word effect, many candidates could not get 
beyond using the word understand to explain understandably. In the case of (c), candidates had to know 
the meaning of the saying and then apply it to the passage. This double task was beyond most of the 
weaker candidates. It was mostly the weaker candidates who had problems with (e) and ((f). 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to grasp implied meanings and not just 
explicit meaning, to make summary assessments and to express these accurately. Teachers should bear in 
mind that questions which require judgements and assessments will always occur on the examination 
paper, in Question 2 and Question 3, with the balance across the two questions differing from year to 
year.
The incidence of particular question types and ways of phrasing questions (e.g. What effect does ...) will 
vary according to the selections the examiners make to ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers 
should therefore familiarise themselves with all sections of the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to 
make sure that they provide practice for students in all the question types specified in the syllabus as well 
as the various ways of phrasing questions. 
Teachers should dissuade students from quoting whole sentences and even paragraphs in answer to a 
simple question. Unusually long answers immediately cause the examiners to think that the candidate 
does not really know the answer. In any case, any answer which provides two or more alternatives in the 
hope that the examiner will select the correct one will automatically be awarded zero marks. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a girl appeared to be reading 
a book to a boy. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the sentences The door was 
closed and the cobwebs in front of it suggested it had not been opened for a long time. Moor turned the 
key and pushed open the door. Question 6 (the descriptive essay) required candidates to describe the 
places along the route of a hike and the ways in which the weather affected the hike. 
- 11 -
Question 4 produced a variety of responses with some weaker candidates resorting to a description of the 
picture rather than concentrating on telling a story. However, most candidates were able to integrate the 
picture quite well into their story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 proved to be the most attractive question for most candidates since they could easily make a 
story from the scenario presented. Though some responses to this question had the stimulus quotation 
inserted without satisfactory integration into the plot, in most cases it was reasonably well done. 
In the case of Question 6, there was continuing improvement over previous years, indicating that 
candidates were better prepared to write a descriptive essay. It was also the case that the way in which the 
question was phrased allowed for more narrative into which candidates could fit their description. This 
year was the first time that performance on Question 6 exactly matched performance on Questions 4 and 
5. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their 
writing classes – how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story￾writing that might interest even reluctant writers. 
Over the years, candidates have used the story lines in films they have seen as the basis for their short 
stories. However, even though originality in story line is not an absolute requirement, candidates should 
not get into the habit of slavishly copying other people‟s material. It may result in the copied parts of 
stories being discredited. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. 
Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood 
and feelings. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing 
and proof reading. In preparing students for narrative writing, teachers should have students focus on 
sequence of events, verb tenses and adverbs and conjunctions of time.
For descriptive writing, students can be encouraged to imagine themselves using a camera and describing 
what they see through the lens as they move the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole 
scene. Students need to get accustomed to the concepts ‘spatial’, ‘temporal’, and ‘sensory’, and to 
understand how these approaches bring order and meaning to their work. Critical reflection on 
their own writing may also be achieved through the analysis of / comparison with a range of 
excellent to poor examples of description. While it is necessary for teachers to get students accustomed 
to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking adjectives and adverbs, 
students should be wary about memorising flowery phrases and sticking them, willy-nilly, into descriptive 
essays. In order to prepare students for descriptive writing, teachers have to focus specifically on 
vocabulary enrichment. One way is by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and 
another of adverbs, and getting students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific 
scenes. Teachers need to make these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
- 12 -
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
Questions 7 & 8
Question 7 asked candidates to write an essay giving their views on the statement Watching television, 
rather than reading, is the best way for children to broaden their knowledge. Question 8 asked candidates 
to present an argument either supporting or opposing the view that the government is wasting too much 
money buying school textbooks because the children are not reading them and that more money should be 
spent on computer equipment, which children prefer. 
Candidates did not demonstrate any significant difference in preference for the one or the other question. 
Performance in this section this year was significantly better than last year probably because the topics 
were very familiar and meaningful to most candidates. There was little difference in performance on the 
two questions. 
The good responses to Question 8 addressed both the matter of children‟s preference and the matter of the 
government investing money in the one or the other. The good responses to Question 7 addressed the 
advantages and disadvantages of both television and reading. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
In responding to arguments, whether in real life or in examination essays, it is necessary to address all 
aspects of the argument that are put forward; not answering a specific aspect suggests that you have a 
problem with that specific aspect. In any case, answers to arguments in examination essays have to be 
comprehensive since marks are assigned to the different parts of a question. In other words, if you omit
part of a question, you automatically lose marks assigned to it. 
While this section of the paper often gives topics which are of immediate interest to teenagers, students 
also need to keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interest. It is not always 
that topics close to the immediate and current experience of teenagers will be given in this section. 
Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially in the 
proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast 
and concession. Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, 
„accordingly‟ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as 
they often are. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2010
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright ©2010 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Paper 01, the multiple-choice paper, accounts for most of the Understanding component of the 
examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounts for all of the Expression 
component as well as part of the Understanding Component (all of Section 2 and part of Section 1). 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers 
is as follows: 
 PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL 
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression _ 90* = 114+
 114+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+
 114+
 190+
 = 100% 
 
* raw score 
+ weighted score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in January 2010 and in the two previous 
years is as follows: 
 
 2008 2009 2010 
 47.8 59.3 54.9 
The overall means for the examination (out of a total of 190) for the years 2008, 2009, 2010 are as 
follows: 
 2008 2009 2010 
 82.23 88.19 86.04 
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple-choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 
60 marks is as follows: 
 2008 2009 2010 
 26.41 27.31 24.44 
Average performance (2008–2010) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below: 
3 
Section 2008 2009 2010
Section A 
Summary Skills 11.51 14.15 11.13 (30) 
Section B 
Comprehension 6.82 8.60 10.11 (30) 
Section C 
Story Writing
Description
14.25 
12.21 
13.29 
10.24 
14.52 (35) 
13.70 (35) 
Section D 
Argument 13.52 13.55 13.77 (35) 
While candidates are encouraged to communicate in order to develop the facility to process and 
articulate ideas, there is a need for them to differentiate between the spoken language and that which 
is written, and to appreciate that Standard English has an international currency. CXC English A is an 
English Language examination and candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in, 
and control of the English Language. 
Preparation for the examination must be a gradual process of developing skills, both receptive 
(comprehension) and productive (expression), in the English language. In the examination, these 
skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks, not only full stops and 
commas, but also colons and semi-colons, as well as other conventions of writing, such as inverted 
commas, capitalization, abbreviations, the writing of numbers, whether in figures or in words, correct 
spelling, proper sentence structure, and paragraphing. Critical reading and thinking skills need also to 
be integral parts of the regular class sessions, because without these skills the tasks of summary
writing, comprehension, argument or discussion are not easily managed. 
Teachers should capitalize on the current interests of the candidates and use topical regional and 
international issues to help them appreciate the value of effective language use, and to help them to 
build personal banks of ideas. It is important to remember that very few candidates are natural 
speakers of Standard English and therefore every learning opportunity should be used. 
Managing the examination is an area for which candidates need to be prepared. Candidates should be 
given strategies for interpreting and responding to tasks; for preparing simple outlines to guide their 
construction of responses; and for effectively editing their work. They need well rehearsed 
procedures for tackling each question. Candidates should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure 
of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy, and producing a fair copy. This is 
especially important in writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing 
a cogent argument. It is only through repeated practice that each individual student will come to some 
understanding of the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy under examination 
conditions. The perception that the English Language examination is not an activity for which the 
candidate needs to prepare should be seriously rejected. 
4 
There are also some basic examination presentation strategies that candidates need to be reminded of: 
it is important to write so the work may be read; care should be taken in deleting and adding 
information. The use of liquid paper should be discouraged in favour of neat crossing out, since 
candidates frequently forget to insert new material in places where the liquid paper was used. 
Correct question numbering and page numbering help ensure that efforts are not misunderstood. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and the
general public regard performance in English Language examinations as a measure of one’s ability to 
perform in the world of work. It should also be remembered that the sort of English required in an 
examination is different from what is normally spoken in every-day life. Preparation for the English 
examination is just as important as it is for any other subject 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Section A - Understanding and Expression
Question 1
Most candidates showed some evidence of overall understanding of the passage to be summarized, 
grasped the concept that ‘infertile soil’ was responsible for the food crisis and in most cases 
demonstrated the ability to pull out two points from it. Several good scripts exhibited good language 
use. Too many candidates, however, still do not know what is required in summary writing. A large 
number of candidates experienced expression problems; hence, communication of their ideas was
ambiguous or even contradictory. In addition, there was often a lack of cohesion. 
 There were very few superior scripts, and candidates evidently experienced several problems 
getting beyond initial understanding of the passage: though they understood the general drift 
of the passage, they clearly had difficulty with the details, and the way those details 
developed and interacted with the main point and thrust of the writing. 
 The habit of lifting and regurgitating chunks from the passage, without analysing the content, 
continues to be a problem. Teachers need to focus more on the need for interpretation and re￾expression of the meaning of what is read — not just changing of words (interpreting rather 
than translation).
 Exceeding the word limit is still a problem. More practice is needed in the strategies of 
achieving economy in writing, in selection of points, and in achieving focus. 
 Organization is another major problem since many candidates show a lack of ability to link
points and ideas logically. Many candidates are limited to the chronology in the original. 
Following are three summaries of the passage which give some idea of different approaches to 
presenting the critical information. 
Sample Summary #1
Various factors contribute to the world’s food crisis. These include pests and diseases, flood and 
drought, poor farming practices, the decreasing amount of cultivable cropland, and, most importantly, 
the increasingly poor quality of soil. Successful attempts have been made to improve seed quality but 
this has limited effect where the soil is poor. Producing better types of plants increased food for a 
5 
short while but failed because of soil. The world food crisis is usually seen as a result of bad 
marketing practices, but other things like water, diseases and soil must not be taken for granted, as is 
usually the case. Attention has been given to improving agricultural practices, but very little is done 
to improve the soil. 
(120 words)
Sample Summary #2
Seeds are improving but food production is falling because soils are deteriorating and people are 
going hungry. According to scientists better varieties resulted in the ‘green evolution’. Many years 
ago, improved plant varieties resulted in the ‘green evolution’. This led to the belief that the crisis 
was over. The hope was short-lived as fertile soil, a critical factor, was lacking. The present food 
crisis, intensified by natural disasters and diseases, could have been averted with the promotion of 
fertilizers in places like Africa. Although they practice modern agricultural techniques, governments 
and charities are not interested in funding projects to improve the quality of soil. 
(105 words)
Sample Summary #3
Although the quality of seeds is improving, soil is getting worse and there is currently a food crisis. 
Soil improvement is critical to solving this crisis. 
While it is true that the crisis is viewed in economic terms, a combination of environmental conditions 
also contributes to creating the desperate food situation. The chief problem is that fertile soil is 
needed to capitalize on the high quality seeds and plants developed through modern scientific 
methods. Research in soil improvement has been neglected because it does not capture the interest of 
governments and charities. They fail to realize that even the best quality seeds cannot flourish without 
good soil. Soil health is needed to avert a worse food crisis. 
(117 words)
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Competence in the techniques of summary is required: a grasp of the thesis; identification of the main 
points; logical organization in which the correct relationships are grasped and expressed, the ability to 
express the material in one’s own words, with an appropriate vocabulary; and completion within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, this is
interpreted as incompetence. 
Summarizing is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters and policemen) and should be 
treated as such by teachers and candidates. In the case of business candidates who may be told that an 
executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case in English —
candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original, and 
words that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself 
and not like a chopped-up version of another one. 
The examiners first determine whether the word limit has been exceeded. Words beyond the word 
limit are not considered. Consideration is next given to whether the candidate has understood and can 
clearly identify the main points in the passage and award marks accordingly. The examiners then 
assess whether the candidate has put those points together in an intelligible and logical manner using 
his/her own words and award marks accordingly. When candidates exceed the word limit, the marks 
may be reduced by as many as twenty per cent; when candidates use only the words in the original 
passage, the marks are automatically reduced by 33 per cent. 
6 
Care must be taken to preserve the meaning of the original, and to avoid the inclusion of extraneous 
material, personal opinion and commentary. In real life, such distortion would be seen as being 
unethical, and it could lead to wrong, unfair and disastrous decisions. 
Section B - Understanding 
Questions 2 and 3
Generally, candidates found the questions in this section within their reach, but there were many 
instances of candidates aiming to succeed by including everything in the section of the passage to 
which the question directs them, when in fact they are required to be specific. There were varied 
weaknesses in answers, most exhibiting vagueness, and problems with expression. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates 
Answers indicate a need for teachers to help students to develop accuracy and control, for example by 
 engaging students in much practice in interpreting and arriving at meaning and 
evidence 
 involving students in practice to develop the habit of focusing and discriminating 
 involving students in activities that develop their vocabulary so as to produce answers 
that are clear and concise 
 engaging students in recognizing the difference between literal and metaphorical 
language. 
The questions in this section are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates 
should pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. Candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. Answers should be to 
the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which 
requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage usually results in zero 
being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidate’s responsibility to indicate clearly what the 
answer is; it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of possibilities given by 
the candidate. 
This section requires candidates to respond to different levels of meaning and to express their answers 
clearly. Candidates also need to do as each question asks: if it requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then 
providing a sentence, for example, is often an indication that the student does not know exactly what 
the answer is. 
Section C - Expression 
Questions 4, 5 and 6
Performance in Section III was generally consistent with past years. There were a few superior scripts 
and also a few incompetent ones. Most of these came from Question 6 (description), as candidates 
7 
continue to ignore the requirement to describe, or to describe the scene and/or period that the question 
asks for. 
Of the three choices given in this section, the most popular was no. 5, the word prompt, while the least 
popular was no. 4, the picture stimulus. 
Question 4 
 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture of a little girl hugging a boy. Both 
children were smiling. Many candidates were prompted to write expository pieces in response to this 
stimulus. 
Question 5 
This stimulus was very popular with candidates. It required them to write a story beginning with the 
sentences ‘He slammed the door behind him. He knew it would be for the last time.’ Performance was 
generally fair. 
Question 6 
Many responses suggested that candidates had not studied the instructions, and, as happened in earlier 
examinations, they wrote mainly narrative, with some description, from the start of the assignment, 
rather than focus on the specific time/place elements for description. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Candidates are advised that they should read the best story from preceding years in order to get a 
sense of what is required, but these stories should not be memorised and reproduced. In addition 
candidates should not disregard the word limit set; the longer the story, the greater the chance of 
grammatical and other errors occurring. Although the question papers state word limits as mainly 
approximations, the experience has been that the better candidates tend to write stories that fall within 
or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be 
rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to 
create atmosphere and mood, and good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, 
mostly behaving like reports, with weak language. Candidates should try to improve their own 
techniques of story writing, including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between 
characters, by studying good stories written by Caribbean and other authors. 
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times they use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, stilted, 
sometimes unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help candidates feel 
comfortable with the simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. 
Oral, spontaneous story-telling based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial 
statements could stimulate some interesting class productions – for listening, writing and peer 
interaction. 
Candidates continue to be unable to differentiate between exposition and description, or to create a 
piece in which the narrative overwhelms the descriptive. Although responses to this question have 
improved over the last three years, there are still too many candidates who are writing a story and not 
paying attention to the instructions given. 
8 
 Description must be clearly constructed and developed. (The different components must be 
detailed, then linked appropriately to create areas of focus; the relevant details must be 
logically and effectively sequenced; and then the different areas of focus and facets must be 
linked appropriately [e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail]).
 The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the descriptive 
elements. 
 Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute 
to the whole picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. 
 Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There 
should be varied and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as appropriate 
choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and setting. 
 Candidates should be encouraged to improve their facility with adjectives and adverbs. 
Section D - Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
The performance in this section was similar to that of earlier examinations but some areas of concern 
continue to be noted. 
Question 7 
This question required candidates to argue for or against the choice of local food. This was not a 
popular choice. While the subject was very topical candidates seemed not prepared to present 
arguments and comment on local foods. Arguments were often undeveloped, lacking illustrative 
details and comparison. 
Question 8 
This was by far the more popular and the better done question. It required candidates to give their 
views on the banning of sexual and violent songs from radio and television. It was topical and 
candidates were able to take a balanced approach to responding. They advanced counter arguments to 
show other areas of blame for behaviour beside sexual and violent songs. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Candidates need to note that skills of argument require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using 
good argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Candidates should pay attention to 
‘tone’ and ‘audience’ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they 
present. Candidates can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and 
editorials in newspapers as well as short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine 
section of newspapers.
9 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully and make sure they understand key words. They 
should then select their points, choose examples that support their points, and be consistent and clear 
in their presentation. Some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that 
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The 
fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of 
opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely 
agree with what they think is the examiners’ view or the socially acceptable view. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2010 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Copyright © 2010 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
– 2 –
GENERAL COMMENTS
The number of candidates writing the examination this year was approximately 100,000. 
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for most of the Understanding component of the examination 
overall, and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the Expression as well as part of the 
Understanding component (part of Question 1 and all of Questions 2 and 3).
The distribution of marks for the two profiles, Expression and Understanding, across the two papers is as 
follows: 
PAPER 01
Multiple Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression – 90* = 114+
 114+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+ 144+
 190+
 = 100% 
* raw score 
+
 weighted score 
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in the two papers this year, and the three 
previous years is as follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
49.01 (RoR*) 41.86 56.44 66.45 
 (T&T*) 49.56 
* Rest of Region 
* Trinidad and Tobago
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 190+
) for 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 is as 
follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
77.94 (RoR) 74.74 81.82 85.33 
 (T&T) 78.58 
Average performance (2007-2010) on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks is as 
follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
23.44 (RoR) 26.24 27.92 26.25 
(T&T) 26.98 
– 3 –
Average performance (2007–2010) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below. 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
Section A 10.04 (30) 10.42 (30) (RoR) 10.69 (30) 14.57 (30) 
Summary Skills 8.78 (30) (T&T) 
Section B 15.45 (29) 8.84 (30) (RoR) 11.13 (30) 9.07 (30) 
Comprehension 12.98 (30) (T&T)
Section C 
Story Writing 13.62 (35) 13.29 (35) (RoR) 13.27 (35) 13.67 (35)
Description 14.25 (35) (T&T)
10.63 (35) 11.23 (35) (RoR) 13.30 (35) 11.42 (35)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
Section D 13.74 (35) 12.78 (35) (RoR) 14.44 (35) 13.28 (35) 
Argument 13.13 (35) (T&T)
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was satisfactory, with approximately 72 per cent of candidates achieving 
acceptable grades. Paper 01 assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through word choice, grammar 
and punctuation as well as meaning constructed from reading literature and opinions expressed in various 
forms. Candidates performed best on items requiring understanding of literary discourse, but were weakest 
on understanding informative discourse, grammar and mechanics. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
The summary expected from candidates writing the CSEC English A examination is one demanding the 
skills used in every-day situations where what is said or what is written may need to be put into a concise 
form. The summary should reflect the general depth and intention of the original while giving all of the 
necessary information in candidates’ own words. There are various approaches to writing summary and 
teachers need to expose students to these. One may simply follow the organization of the original, moving 
chronologically through the points. Summary may also begin with the conclusion and then show the line of 
reasoning and facts. The important requirement is that the correct relationships between the points must be 
maintained, so that the meaning is unchanged and clear. Additionally, while it is not necessary to capture 
every detail, it is important that vital information is not ignored. A good vocabulary is an asset that should 
be cultivated, since a summary must be rendered in one’s own words. 
The responses to the summary question continue to suggest that many candidates are not being taught the 
skills of summary writing. There is persistent wholesale or partial lifting. In a large number of instances 
where the main points are grasped, the summaries fail because not enough attention is given to organization 
and meaning. Large numbers of candidates continue to have problems comprehending the passages set. 
This is directly related to the lack of comprehension skills generally. Poor vocabulary, poor understanding 
– 4 –
of grammar and punctuation, weak grasp of connotative language, and weak reasoning are among the 
elements contributing to misinterpretation. Section A tests two elements: understanding and expression, 
hence the importance of comprehension skills. Candidates must not see ‘comprehension’ as a textbook 
activity, but as an essential part of daily life. 
Often the skill of paraphrasing is confused with summarizing — paraphrasing will generally increase, rather 
than reduce the length, so that in such cases many of the main points come outside of the word limit. 
Question 1
The summary passage on cassava proved to be generally manageable, based on a topic of which most 
candidates have some knowledge. There was a general improvement in candidates’ performance in writing 
the summary, with more candidates demonstrating those skills needed to show competence. However, the 
general weaknesses continued, with such responses reflecting the same problems that have been identified in 
the past: lack of understanding of the passage, the use of extraneous information, use of the language of the 
text, and overall weakness in the use of language. This year, like other years, there were many instances 
where candidates wrote letters and stories about cassava preparation and use in their own homes. Not only 
did they misunderstand or ignore the instructions, but they indicated a serious inability to address what was
asked, without permitting what was known to interfere. In instances where it was obvious that candidates 
were attempting to write in their own words, vocabulary deficiency was a problem. 
Section B: Comprehension
In Section B, there are two kinds of texts, representing the literary and the expository genres. The questions 
require precise answers rather than the general or vague. Candidates should pay close attention to every 
word that is used in the textual piece (prose, poetry, drama) and recognize the various levels of meaning. Of 
importance too, is the fact that questions are asked in various ways. Teachers need to ensure that in 
preparing students, they use the taxonomy to help them to become familiar with types of question words and 
meaning. In response to each question, candidates are expected to answer precisely what they are asked. 
These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which requires a specific 
answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, one which usually results in zero 
being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates’ responsibility to indicate clearly what the answer is; 
it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of possibilities given by the candidate.
Questions 2 and 3
Most candidates performed fairly well on this section, with Question 2 being the one with which candidates 
were more comfortable. Question 3 appeared to be more demanding. 
Questions that candidates found most challenging were 2(d), 3(c), 3(f), 3(g), and 3(h). All these questions 
required making judgements rather than lifting answers from the passage. Question 2(d) required the 
candidates not to simply list the occupations, or choose one, but to decide on the main occupation; Question 
3(c) required them to decide on not why ‘gut’ feeling has to be developed, but why it has to be ‘deliberately
developed’; 3(f) presented problems to candidates who simply lifted from the passage; 3(g) was a test of 
ability to derive the meaning of an unfamiliar word from its context; 3(h) required the ability to arrive at 
overall meaning and the writer’s intention in a passage. 
Section C: Story Writing 
It is recognized that candidates seem to read less than before, with each year-group reading less than the one 
before it. One reality is that the adult world supplies the student world with film, visual stories which reduce 
the need to read for pleasure or entertainment, and sometimes even for knowledge — there is no need to 
imagine, since the visual preempts this activity. However, the movie concretizes a story: there is character, 
setting, theme, conflict, climax; there are details, moods and tones. The movie gives opportunity for 
critique: what worked, why it did, where the situation was unrealistic, where and how could things have 
been improved? What would a sequel contain: what other perspectives are possible? What would you write 
– 5 –
if you wanted to convey the beauty, emotion or some other abstract aspect to someone who did not see the 
movie? Are the spoken words alone enough to help someone experience the power of the movie? This 
suggests that while we continue to persuade our candidates into reading, we need to accept their differences 
and make more use of their world to stimulate their minds and efforts. Different types of stimuli are 
provided in the examination for story writing — the more visual student is helped by a picture stimulus, but 
this kind of stimulus is not designed to exclude anyone. 
Candidates need to be encouraged to evaluate their own stories using a given set of criteria. The categories 
used in marking the examination are public. They are ‘incompetent’ including ranges 1 and 2, ‘competent’ 
including ranges 3 and 4, and ‘superior’, ranges 5 and 6. Teachers should help students to apply these 
categories in assessing their own efforts in the attempt to improve their skills. 
A negative practice clearly evidenced by candidates’ stories is that they prepare a story and are determined 
to write this story regardless of the stimuli given, or they tack the stimulus on to the final paragraph in the 
hope that it may be absorbed. In both instances, their responses are clearly incompetent, and assessed in this 
range. 
Questions 4 and 5
By far the more popular and better done was Question 5, but Question 4 was also attempted by many 
candidates. Overall, candidates continue to be poor to moderate in this section. The vast majority fell into 
the ‘competent’ group, mainly at the lower end of the mark scheme. There were only occasional 
exceptionally good scripts. The responses generally indicate weaknesses in story-writing techniques, as well 
as significant weaknesses in fundamental language competencies. 
Section C – Descriptive Writing
Comments made on Question 6 in previous years bear repeating here: description must be clearly 
constructed and developed, having the different components linked appropriately. Details must be logically 
and effectively sequenced. The different areas of focus must be linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. 
foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must 
be related to the purely descriptive elements. The choice of features to be described must be clearly 
motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be 
consistent within itself: any change in perspective (time, perspective, mood, tone) must be clearly 
established. There should be varied and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as 
appropriate choice of words (nouns, verbs, concrete adjectives, adverbs) to create setting and atmosphere. In 
short, the object should be to enable the audience to see and to vicariously experience what is being 
described.
Question 6
Question 6 continues to be the least popular in Section C. Where it was attempted, too much narrative was 
included in the response. Among the weak responses, the descriptions were merely a listing of details, with 
little sense of the spatial or the other elements that would make the description meaningful. 
It is clear that the question is not yet achieving, to a significant degree, the purpose for which it was 
introduced — to provide an option to the story-writing questions. Only the exceptional candidates appear to 
perform well on this question, which suggests that the writing of description is not being given enough 
attention in classrooms. 
Section D – Argument 
This section tests candidates’ expression skills: how they organize thoughts for maximum effect, moving 
smoothly from one idea to another; how to express those views clearly and succinctly; how to use supporting 
elements; the techniques of audience appeal; the skill of reasoning and the ability to recognize and separate 
opinion from fact are among the skills assessed. Topics will be related to current social issues and elements 
– 6 –
which appeal to or fall within the experience of the student, but the skills of reasoning, whether in arguing 
for, against, or in giving one’s reasoned views should be acquired by using as wide a range of stimuli as 
possible. Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially 
in the proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast 
and concession. Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by contrast’, 
‘accordingly’ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as 
they often are. 
Question 7
This question presented challenges with interpretation. ‘Obedience’ was sometimes defined culturally as 
‘[having] manners’, and a variety of other positives such as ‘trustworthiness’ and ‘submissiveness’. The 
examination is a test of candidates’ ability to use Standard English as an international currency. While the 
foregoing kind of answer is not completely ‘wrong’, is it at best only a partial satisfaction of the appropriate 
task.
Question 8
The topic, ‘Sexual and violent songs’ produced scripts that never lacked content; candidates who attempted 
this question had much to write, so they did well in Area 1, but many experienced problems with Area 2. 
The topic ‘Caribbean doctors’ produced fairly good responses and some of the arguments were very good. 
Candidates made many interesting points and showed good language control. 
Recommendations for Teachers
Teachers should:
 Help candidates to see the relevance of the various areas of study to the immediate and future 
quality of their lives. 
 Teach for and encourage transfer of knowledge and skills. 
 Encourage candidates to see and respect the differences in the language varieties they speak and 
hear. 
 Help candidates to understand the need, on the one hand, for Standard English mastery as their 
international currency, and on the other, the value of their own dialect in identifying with the local 
and regional space.
 Facilitate and encourage reading by using various strategies: teach English Language through 
English Literature or other study texts. 
 Not teach for the examination but teach strategies for tackling the examination — the skill of 
outlining to improve organization and succinctness; the allocation of time; how to make corrections; 
the importance of correct numbering and how to interpret questions are some examples.
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2011 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The examination in January 2011 followed the same format as in previous years. Paper 01 — the 
multiple-choice paper — tested the Understanding profile, and Paper 02 — the free response 
paper — tested both the Understanding and Expression profiles. 
Performance remained stable in January 2011. Fifty-four per cent of candidates achieved Grades 
I–III. This was consistent with overall performance in January 2010 when the percentage of 
candidates who achieved this level stood at 55 per cent. The percentage of candidates at the 
Grade I level increased to 9.13 in 2011 from 7.08 in 2010, and 7.7 in 2009. There was significant 
improvement in the performance on Profile I — Understanding, and a more modest improvement 
on Profile II — Expression. 
Most students produced scripts that fell within the levels of suggesting or demonstrating 
competence. There were only a few superior scripts at one end, and also a few incompetent 
scripts at the other. This seems to indicate a need for teaching to focus more on improving the 
quality of students' general understanding and writing skills. 
This target can be achieved through careful reading and critical thinking that leads to the 
synthesis of ideas, and more exposure to a wide range of topics that allows for garnering ideas 
and information for further use. The goal should be to widen the students‘ experiences with good 
models. 
Equal focus must be placed on both what is written and how it is written. The latter goes beyond 
the mechanics of writing in terms of correct use of grammar to also include greater focus on
choice of words, tone and perspective or writer's stance. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was good, with approximately 79 per cent of candidates achieving 
Grades I and II. The mean on this paper was 30.57 out of a weighted total of 46. Paper 01 
assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through word choice, grammar and punctuation as 
well as meaning constructed from reading literature, informational text and opinions expressed in 
various forms. Candidates performed best on items requiring understanding of literary discourse. 
Retrieving explicitly stated information and ideas, and making straight forward inferences were 
well done. 
3 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1
This question requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and reproduce its meaning 
concisely and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak responses 
indicate usually major problems with understanding the passage, and with the ability to express 
meaning in the candidate‘s own words (synthesis). Many candidates try to succeed by lifting 
chunks or ‗cutting and pasting‘ them together in ways that indicate attempts to hide the fact that 
they are reproducing the words of the passage. Teaching should concentrate on helping students 
to grasp and reproduce meaning. Exercises in equivalent sentences are useful, and can be 
extended beyond one sentence to a paragraph, and further. Practice in comprehension that 
involves interpretation (not just re-wording) — executed both orally and in writing, is likely to 
be also very useful. 
Summarizing involves two major processes: information gathering (reading, identifying and 
interpreting what is relevant) and information giving (synthesizing, organizing and writing). 
Teaching must move beyond 'identifying points' to include understanding how the text is 
organized. Focusing on text organizational patterns such as cause and effect, problems and 
solution, before and after, and similar developmental strategies can lead students to greater 
comprehension and synthesis of information before they begin to write. 
The summary question is awarded a total of 30 marks, evenly distributed among three areas: 
 Understanding (Content) 
 Organization 
 Expression 
The text in January consisted of information with which most candidates would be familiar, and 
their answers generally indicated that they understood the contents. It is in this area —
understanding — that candidates continue to score well. Generally the instruction to write in 
continuous prose is observed. However, two problems persist. One of these is the practice of 
lifting the language of the text, apart from the permitted use of technical expressions. It now 
seems to be the norm to ignore the instruction to express the meaning as far as possible in your 
own words. The second is the continued ignoring of the prescribed length by a high percentage 
of candidates, despite repeated warnings that marks will be lost. Any points coming after the 
4 
word limit of 120 words are not rewarded. In fact, the need to go over the limit suggests that 
candidates are not as capable as they might be in organizing their thoughts, so they can also 
expect a lower mark under Organization. Satisfactory answers to this question 
- identified the theme/subject, and the thesis or general thrust of the discussion 
- located the specific issue and the reasons for focusing on this issue 
- identified the causes of the problem (general and specific) 
- examined specific areas by definition, recognition of causes and effects 
- described the outlook for the future and the reasons for those views. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- While students MUST use their own words, ―in your own words‖ does not require 
avoidance of key words of the passage. The technical jargon (scientific terms, 
specialized vocabulary) of some passages cannot be avoided when students are 
writing summaries. 
- Students need to undertake extensive practice in organizing their answers, using 
transition words to help the reader with understanding and readability and using 
simple, correct language. 
- Students should be reminded that to reuse the words of the passage entirely (whether 
as a whole chunk or by joining phrases from all over) attracts no marks — as the 
student has not presented any of his/her own words for assessment. Staying within 
the word limit is another area for practice. 
- Engage students in more close-reading exercises — paying closer attention to writer's 
intention. 
- The internal structure of the passage should be emphasized and organizational 
patterns reinforced so that students understand the importance of cohesion and 
coherence. 
- Emphasize the teaching of paragraph cohesion and the use of appropriate transitions 
and connectives. 
- Build vocabulary and spelling skills to help with comprehension. 
5 
- Students should be taught the critical elements for superior organization and 
language: transitional phrases and the value to achieving economy; using appropriate 
transitions; avoiding arbitrary use. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Questions 2 and 3
Candidates demonstrated knowledge of the requirements of Questions (a) to (d) which largely 
required recalling information explicitly stated in the passages. It was evident that most 
respondents had a good understanding of what the extracts were about and therefore could give 
correct responses to the questions that did not test higher-order skills involving evaluating or
synthesizing information. Evaluating content, language and textual elements proved difficult in 
some instances. 
 
The individual parts that proved challenging for Question 3 were (e), (f), (g) and (h). While 
candidates understood the nature of the questions, they struggled to analyse and synthesize the 
information and to link it to the writers' overall meaning. Question (h) in particular proved most 
difficult for candidates. This required them to draw a conclusion from the last three sentences of 
the passage. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- The teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined with the teaching of summary 
writing as both require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
- Students should be helped to be more focused on interpretation, more discriminating in their 
answers; more concerned with answering what is asked, not what is usually asked. 
- As with Section A, much practice is advised in reading, listening, and reproducing meaning; 
in interpreting meaning at different levels; and in paying attention to accuracy. 
- Practice in vocabulary building that involves not lists of words, but discerning meaning in 
context, is advised; practice in producing and responding to varied plausible responses helps 
students to ‗see‘ how writing may be interpreted, but there should also be insistence on 
accuracy in cases where some answers are not plausible responses to a stimulus or not 
supported by the passage. 
6 
- Developing sensitivity to how words and sentences work in the language is important, so that 
students rise above the level of seeing comprehension as guesswork or ‗anything goes‘. 
Section C: Story Writing and Descriptive Essay 
Question 4
The picture stimulus was well interpreted by candidates. It evoked various scenes and events 
involving the character in the picture. The facial expression was often interpreted as grief, pain, 
loss or some suffering that the character experienced. 
Question 5
The stimulus on which candidates were to base their story was ―Kenia considered the plan she 
had made. She looked around sadly, then nodded. It was the best decision‖. Most responses were 
pre-occupied with rape/sex and the abuse of teenagers by family members. The tales often lost 
sight of the stimulus, which was not effectively used. Candidates had difficulty integrating the
stimulus into their narratives, so that most often it was 'tacked on' at the end. 
Question 6
Candidates were required to describe the scenes and atmosphere in a stadium based on the 
stimulus ―The huge crowd rose to its feet as the athletes entered the stadium‖. Candidates were 
able to relate to the activities and events in a stadium. Most were often able to (though not in 
great detail) describe the ‗atmosphere‘ and ‗scenes‘, and very often successfully appealed to the 
readers' senses. 
Generally, the question continues to pose challenges for candidates who have not mastered the 
writing of a descriptive essay. Their responses fall into the realm of the narrative which is the 
genre of writing tested in Questions 4 and 5. There were some instances of misinterpretation of 
the 'time frame' of incidents/events/scenes. In some instances, there was no focus on the athletes. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- While there were some highly competent and superior scripts in response to Question 6, most 
scripts continue to be unsatisfactory mostly because students ignore the rubric. 
- Students need to be taught how to write a descriptive essay, and to recognize (not simply told 
or shown) differences between it and a story. One way in which this can be done is by an 
7 
immersion strategy involving reading and writing descriptive essays, and similar immersion 
in stories, some of which will involve description, but are not simply descriptive essays. 
- A descriptive essay allows for creativity in the same way the story does. Candidates may 
impose their own interpretation (so long as it is valid), and create their own scenes based on 
valid interpretation of the subject. Within the scene they can create different elements or 
aspects. 
- Teachers are advised to treat the writing of description as a writing experience into which 
they put in as much preparation as they do for story writing — and encourage every student 
to write a number of descriptive essays until they know how to do them. This is more 
advisable than the practice of preparing students for stories only, thus closing an option that 
they might well have found interesting and suited to their interests and abilities. 
- A danger in teaching ‗story‘ only is that the stimulus set in the exam may not appeal strongly 
to a particular student and so may only evoke a mediocre response. Full exposure and 
teaching give the students a fair chance to do well. 
 
Section D: Persuasive Writing 
More candidates did Question 7 which required them to give their views on the need for special
institutions for bullies, than Question 8 which required an argument for or against the testing of 
school students for HIV, with or without their parents‘ consent. 
Candidates were familiar with the subject of ‗bullying‘ in schools. Candidates spent most of the 
time dealing with bullying — the behaviour, the causes and the effects and sharing anecdotes 
from personal experiences. The focus should have been whether there should be an institution for 
those given to bullying. 
Candidates responded well to Question 8 whether they were supporting or opposing the view. 
The words ‗with or without consent‘ used in the question posed a challenge for some candidates. 
Many candidates did not establish a clear position in their line of argument. 
Suggestions for Teachers in Addressing Weaknesses 
 
- Strategies such as listening to and presenting arguments followed by peer critiquing of 
arguments are usually useful. 
8 
- The writing and presentation of papers and speeches are also useful, as are debates, advice 
corners, improvised situations such as talk-shows, and other means of promoting thoughtful 
speech and writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2011 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance this year was fair and compares favourably with the previous two years. The 
percentage of candidates who achieved Grades I−III was 67 compared with 66 in 2010 and 56 in 
2009. The overall mean was 88 compared with 85 in 2010 and 82 in 2009. Generally, the 
incidence of students being wholly unprepared for the examination was small, so that answers 
suggesting or demonstrating incompetence were fewer. When the examination is taken as a whole, 
there is some improvement, but individual questions reveal fluctuations in the quality of 
performance. 
While candidates seem to be taught the aspects of the syllabus which are examined, some 
candidates do not demonstrate the quality of skills that produce excellent responses. Most 
responses fall into the category of being adequate. There is strong evidence that questions/stimuli 
are not read carefully and not fully thought through. This results in many misinterpretations and 
inadequate responses. 
The following examples are indicative of this. Section D this year included a stimulus that required 
students to express their views on the issue of banning the import of fruits and vegetables, in order 
to support local agriculture. Attention was drawn to a response which replaced the word import
with export, used the word repeatedly and with confidence throughout the essay, and so missed the 
issue entirely. Equally concerning was the inclination of some candidates, in responding to 
Question 5 in Section C, to choose one of the indeterminate objects in the background of the 
picture and to make the story revolve around that, rather than around anything that was 
foregrounded. 
There are still instances of candidates answering more than one question. Not only is this a poor 
examination strategy, since it takes time away from other questions, but it suggests that candidates 
do not take care to read or study the instructions. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 — Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. The mean mark on this paper was 30 out of 46 
compared with 26 in 2010 and 28 in 2009. Candidates generally performed well on items of word 
choice, grammar and mechanics and on comprehension passages based on informative, literary and 
persuasive discourse. Items presenting difficulty were those requiring evaluation of the 
effectiveness of language devices such as irony, innuendo and symbolism as well as evaluating 
appropriate use of code and style in relation to the author’s intention. 
Paper 02 — Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1
This question required candidates to demonstrate both understanding and expression skills. The 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific 
discussions, analyses). The skills of selection and concise expression are targeted. Included in the 
- 3 -
syllabus is the following advice: Summaries require economy of language, the careful selection of 
the relevant main ideas, and the preservation of the intention of the original.
While most candidates managed to select the appropriate information for their answers, of that 
group, only a small minority showed mastery of the skill of writing clearly and concisely, in their
own words. Fewer candidates still, were able to maintain the correct relationships while 
reorganizing their points for brevity. They clung steadfastly to both the pattern and the language of 
the original, a strategy that often worked against conciseness. Most candidates continued to lift the 
points entirely. Often, connectives were not used so cohesion was lost. There were extreme cases 
where candidates’ concept of summary was to simply copy the first 120 words of the passage. 
The mean for the summary this year was 14 out of 30 compared with 15 in 2010 and 11 in 2009. 
The passage this year appears to have been well within candidates’ reach, and they scored 
reasonably well in the content area. Following the original organization slavishly, led to answers 
that exceeded the limit and so candidates lost marks. Failure to use their own language also earned 
low marks. Those candidates who performed in the range 9 –18 selected relevant details but 
generally did not maintain the original focus. 
A close look at the syllabus section Notes and Suggested Activities (specifically pages 6 –12) will 
help both teacher and student to identify and hone summary skills. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Section B is designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one 
expository. The skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) 
(pages 2–3). Weaker candidates responded well mainly to the first three of the ten objectives under 
(b) – recognizing facts stated explicitly, extracting specific and implied information. 
Question 2
The literary passage dealt with a children’s activity, hide-and-seek. The mean mark on this 
question was 7 out of 15. Part (a) asked simply for the name of the game. Examiners recognized 
that the game was called differently in the various countries, and these names were accepted. 
Part (c), which required deducing meaning, was frequently incorrectly answered as candidates were 
unable to go beyond the literal and repeated the answer for the previous question. The parts most 
answered incorrectly or omitted were (e), (f), (g) and (i). In (g), it was not recognized that a 
conflict must involve at least two elements. Similarly candidates failed to capture two sides of the 
oxymoron in (i). Questions relating to appropriateness of tone, connotative meaning and writer’s 
craft were not well answered. 
Question 3 
The mean mark for this question was also 7 out of 15. 
The problem parts were (f) where there was an inability to draw the inference, and (h) where again 
there was an inability to grasp and explain the oxymoron. It was noted that fewer candidates 
attempted to lift segments of the passage and tried to answer every question; there were fewer 
instances of no response. 
- 4 -
Candidates continue to ignore the use of the term phrase, and give instead full sentences or even 
paragraphs, and so lose marks. This prompts the reiteration of the need to teach students to study 
the requirements of individual questions. 
Section C: Story Writing 
This year, Question 4 was the most popular. Question 6 was the least popular in this section. The 
stories demonstrated generally that competence in writing standard English is weak. 
Question 4
This question used a picture of an elderly man playing a guitar as a stimulus. Candidates seemed 
generally comfortable with the picture stimulus. It prompted stories with good characterization and 
emotional involvement. Story lines tended to be similar, but those scoring the higher marks 
managed to create conflict or relationships with grandchildren, and tended to use symbolism. 
Reflection and flash back techniques were also attempted. The mean mark was 13 out of 35. 
Question 5 
This question was better handled. It was based on the stimulus A cold hand grasped his wrist as he 
slumped to the ground. Many candidates made unconvincing use of the stimulus often tacking it 
on to the end or barely including it in the story. The mean mark was 15 out of 35. 
Question 6 
This question was a challenge largely because candidates seemed unfamiliar with the word 
pedestrian. The question was based on the stimulus The streets were filled with pedestrians in 
anticipation of their new leader. Another challenge was also the need to describe mood and 
atmosphere, so that a significant number of answers scored between 10 and 13 marks. This year 
saw some resurgence of the tendency towards narration rather than description. At the same time, 
those candidates who understood the requirements wrote very good pieces. The mean mark for this 
question was 12 out of 35. 
Section D: Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
Both of these questions should have been quite suitable given the demands of the syllabus. The 
content required to respond to them should have been sufficiently within candidates’ experience. 
Question 7 required candidates to write an essay giving their views on the topic The government 
should ban the importation of all fruits and vegetables in support of local production. Question 8 
required an argument supporting or opposing the view that Hungry students cannot learn. Free 
lunch should be provided for all secondary school students.
Each question was structured in such a way that there were two parts to be linked to produce an 
acceptable response. This presented a major difficulty for large numbers of candidates who failed 
to create necessary links between the two parts; for example, candidates might argue hungry 
students cannot learn OR free lunch should be provided. 
Some of the responses were quite long − in several cases two or three pages, well over the word
limit. In addition, many candidates had ideas but did not have the language skills necessary to 
- 5 -
articulate those ideas well. The mean mark for Questions 7 and 8 were 16 and 14 out of 35, 
respectively. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
• It is clear that hundreds of students across the Caribbean have not mastered the use of 
Standard English. There continues to be interference from dialects and patois used 
throughout the region; to these have been added the slangs originating from dancehall music 
and the North American ghettos and the abbreviations familiar to users of the messaging 
media of modern technology. For students who almost abhor reading, some methods must 
be found to encourage correct use of the language. 
• Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when 
summarizing and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their 
responses into a coherent whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to introduce 
these words into the active vocabulary of students. Practice in construction shifts and 
equivalent sentences would be useful. 
• The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
• Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and in attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words 
and sentences work in the language is important. 
• Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through regular reading of good 
literature. This includes attention to paragraphing, grammar, spelling, diction and other 
conventions of writing. 
• Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story￾writing and descriptive writing. 
• Greater use should be made of literature to teach writing−immersion into how stories work. 
• Strategies should be engaged to provide individual help to students so that personal needs 
can be addressed. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2012 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance in the January examination was moderate. Most candidates produced competent scripts. 
Very few superior scripts were in evidence, and, at the other end, there was no startling number of 
incompetent scripts. What the examination results suggest, particularly through the questions which call 
for reading and understanding, is that most candidates‘ reading is superficial. As a result, candidates miss 
what is being asked when they need to study and respond to questions. Research has established that poor 
reading and comprehension skills lead to poor writing skills. There is much need for teaching to focus 
more on improving the quality of students‘ general understanding and writing skills. 
This target can be achieved through encouraging discussion, interactive reading where students are taught 
how to question what they read and to let themselves feel free to interpret or reinterpret the texts, more 
exposure to a wide range of topics and styles of writing, that allows the garnering of ideas and 
information for further use — in short, seek to widen the students‘ experiences with good models. Equal 
focus must be placed on what is written and how it is written. All of this is even more crucial since in our 
technologically advanced environment and instant solutions, our students are encouraged to be very 
visual. There is no need, or time, to imagine; they are accustomed to being given the interpretations. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. Seventy-six per cent of candidates achieved scores at the level 
of Grades I-III. The mean score for the paper was 26 out of a weighted total of 46. Candidates performed 
fairly well on Questions 1–20 which assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through grammar and 
mechanics. Questions 21–28 assessed understanding of literary text, sampled by a poem and candidates 
showed good understanding of the details of the poem, as well as the tone of the poet. Performance on 
the narrative passage was also good while on the expository passage, performance was fair. Candidates 
were generally able to recognize cause and effect, identify main ideas and draw conclusions. The weakest 
performance was noted on Questions 43–60 which assessed understanding of persuasive text. Candidates 
were unable in instances to distinguish fact from opinion and to identify language devices used by the 
writer.
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1 
This question requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and reproduce its meaning concisely 
and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak scripts usually indicate 
major problems with understanding of the passage, and with ability to express meaning in the candidate‘s 
own words (synthesis). The summary question is awarded total marks of 30, evenly distributed under 
three headings: Understanding (Content), Organization, and Expression. Generally, candidates did not 
show any great difficulty in responding to this question, particularly in understanding the content. 
However, weak responses indicated a lack of the basic skills of summary writing — using one’s own 
words without changing the meaning of the passage. ‗Lifting‘, as the examiners term the partial or 
wholesale use of words of the passage, is therefore common. This is a major difficulty, and one which 
causes candidates to lose considerable marks under Expression. Some candidates attempt to use their own 
words, but are seriously handicapped by poor vocabulary. 
3 
Particular effort needs to be taken to teach strategies for organization. Most candidates choose to follow 
the order of the original text, and this often prevents them from achieving a shorter piece of writing. It is 
most important that students be taught to recognize the relationship and the links between the main ideas 
in the passage, so that they are not tied to copying the movement of the passage. 
Candidates continue to ignore word limits, provide irrelevant details, unnecessary examples, and present 
information that was not provided in the passage. A major tendency is to write in short paragraphs. It is 
necessary to remind candidates that the summary has no single topic sentence, and should really be a 
paragraph which pulls together the essence of several paragraphs. There is a rich section on the kind of 
activities that can foster the necessary summary skills included in the English A syllabus. 
The passage set for January 2012 dealt with our dependence on fossil fuel, oil. The summary expected 
should have included: 
- The disadvantages of dependency on oil 
- The advantages offered by renewable energy 
- The challenges to be faced if renewable energy sources are to be successfully used. 
Below are examples of summaries that could illustrate what was expected of candidates. 
Sample Summary No. 1 
The high price of oil has caused us to look for alternative sources of energy, which can be produced at a 
lower cost and are now environmentally friendly. Using renewable energy sources, which are resources 
that never run out, offers many advantages. They are usually indigenous to a country and so reduce the 
need for foreign exchange, do not pollute the environment, have a multitude of applications and can be 
accessed anywhere. However, the cost of implementing the use of renewable energy is very high. To 
successfully develop its production and use, large investments are needed. There must be policies that 
provide incentives, such as reducing import duties and selling excess electricity. 
Sample Summary No. 2 
The world is dependent on oil which is a non-renewable resource. We suffer because oil producing 
countries often raise the price, and our fuel costs also rise. In addition, oil production is not 
environmentally friendly. Developing renewable energy offers advantages. Since it comes in several 
forms, a variety of ways of producing it is possible, even in remote places. It costs less than oil, is more 
environmentally friendly and saves foreign exchange as there is no need to import. Developing 
renewable energy, however, is difficult. It demands much capital investment. Policies that help by 
creating incentives to invest, produce and use renewable energy, are also needed. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Questions 2 and 3 
There were two types of passages used in this section — the literary and the expository. What was seen 
was a marked difference in the performance of candidates on Question 2 and 3. The inclusion of literary 
questions and the interpretation of the writer‘s style in Question 3 proved to be difficult for many 
candidates. 
4 
Candidates' Performance on Question 2 
The passage was taken from Harriet’s Daughter, a former English B text. It addressed the narrator‘s 
mixed feelings towards her father who, in her opinion, is disdainful of his Black heritage. Fifteen marks 
were allocated to a total of eight questions on the passage, one question being subdivided into two parts.
The language of the passage was appropriate for this academic level.
Candidates were able to identify the occupation (a) and views (b) (i) of the narrator‘s father and were also 
able to recognize irony (c) and sarcasm (f). Questions which required candidates to identify and 
understand attitude (b) (ii) and feelings (g) were not well answered. Similarly, although they were able to 
correctly select an expression showing sarcasm, candidates were unable to use the context of the passage 
to arrive at the meaning of the sarcastic phrase ―he’s so concerned about being coloured…‖
It was commendable that most candidates attempted even those questions (e), (g) (h) which apparently 
were challenging to them. Teachers should continue to encourage such efforts. With regard to developing 
higher level skills of comprehension, regular class and group discussions on appropriate passages will 
help students not only to identify, but to understand and articulate attitudes, feelings and tone. 
Candidates' Performance on Question 3 
Generally, candidates appeared to understand the passage, but they struggled to analyse and synthesize 
the responses and linked them to the writers' overall meaning. The mean on this question was 6 out of 15 
marks. Weaker candidates had difficulty on Parts (c), (e), (f) (g). In Part (c), although the answer 
appeared clearly in the second line of paragraph two, candidates tended to use peripheral information. 
The term ‗bedrock‘ in Part (f) should have been understood from the context in the passage, but proved to 
be a hurdle for many; and question (g) saw many candidates either misinterpreting the question, or 
attempting to answer by lifting the entire statement containing the words used in the statement. 
Recommendations for Teachers
Here last January‘s comments bear reiteration, the teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined 
with the teaching of summary writing as both require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
Summary writing goes another step, but understanding is the primary stage. It is suggested that students 
be helped to be more focused on interpretation; to be more discriminating in their answers; and to 
recognize what is asked, not what is usually asked. Benefits can be had from practice in vocabulary 
building that involves not lists of words, but discerning meaning in context; practice in producing and 
responding to varied plausible responses helps students to ―see‖ how writing may be interpreted. There 
should also be insistence on accuracy in cases where some answers are not plausible responses to a 
stimulus or supported by the passage. Developing sensitivity to how words and sentences work in the 
language is important, so that students rise above the level of seeing comprehension as guesswork or 
‗anything goes‘. 
Section C: Story Writing and Descriptive Essay 
There was a noticeable increase in the number of candidates who wrote on topics that were not given on 
the examination paper. Although some responses demonstrated competence in English, the candidates 
failed to score because they did not use the stimulus. Most scripts fell within the range of suggesting 
competence to low levels of demonstrating competence. 
5 
Question 4 
The mean on this question was 12 out of a total of 35 marks. The picture stimulus was not well 
interpreted. In some instances candidates did not focus their writing sufficiently on the foreground of the 
picture to develop their stories. 
 
Question 5 
This question required a response to the following stimulus: ―Martine and Sam huddled in the scanty 
shelter, looked back at what was left of their house and wondered what to do next.‖ Write a story which 
includes these words. While their language was competent, many candidates failed to answer the 
question. The mean on the question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
Question 6 
Generally, this question continues to pose challenges for candidates who have not mastered the writing of 
a descriptive essay. As in the past, most responses continue to use narrative as the vehicle for description. 
However, techniques such as moving in an orderly fashion over the scene, of widening or narrowing the 
view, are being used more than before, which is an encouraging feature. More work needs to be done on 
encouraging students to let characters contemplate, internalize, and reflect on the scenes suggested, so as 
to include feelings and reactions in the response to the task. The mean on the question was 13 out of 35 
marks. 
Section D: Persuasive Writing
The topics were within candidates‘ scope of knowledge. Nevertheless, both topics were not fully argued
and explored from an informed position. Too few ‗tools of argument‘ were employed. Weak responses 
indicated a lack of a clear position on the topics.
Question 7 
Candidates were required to write an essay supporting the views of either of two speakers based on 
whether homework was a waste of time or a rewarding activity and necessary for success in life. This 
question was the more widely chosen of the two options. The mean was 13 out of 35 marks. In many 
instances, candidates merely stressed the idea that homework is good practice while largely ignoring the 
part of the question that asked about its relationship to success in life. There were a few candidates who 
disagreed, but were unable to give valid or meaningful reasons for their disagreement. 
Question 8 
Candidates were required to give their views on whether it should be mandatory for all secondary school 
students to participate in extra-curricular activities as a requirement for graduation. There were varied 
interpretations of ‗extra-curricular‘. Some candidates did not appear to fully understand the meaning of 
the expression. As was the case with Question 7, the last part of the question was largely ignored. Some 
candidates dealt with why it is good to participate in extracurricular activities, but did not make the 
connection with its requirement for graduation. The mean on the question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
6 
Suggestions for Teachers in Addressing Weaknesses 
Strategies such as listening to and presenting arguments followed by peer critiquing of arguments are 
usually useful. Writing and presentation of papers and speeches are also useful, as are debates, advice 
corners, improvised situations such as talk shows, and other means of promoting thoughtful speech and 
writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
®
EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2012 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS 
General performance this year declined when compared with the 2011 results. The percentage of candidates 
who achieved Grades IIII was 48 compared with 67 in 2011 and 66 in 2010. The overall mean was 77 
compared with 88 in 2011, and 85 in 2010. The incidence of candidates being apparently wholly 
unprepared for the examination was higher than that of May/June 201l. Answers suggesting or 
demonstrating incompetence were higher in specific sections. 
Generally, candidates appeared to have been taught the various aspects of the syllabus, but were unable to 
demonstrate the quality of skills that produce excellent responses. Most responses continue to fall into the 
category of being adequate. There remains strong indication that questions are not read carefully and not 
fully thought through, resulting in misinterpretation and inadequate responses. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 — Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was satisfactory. Candidates generally continue to perform well on items of word 
choice, grammar and mechanics and on comprehension passages based on informative and persuasive 
discourse, and less well on literary items. Items presenting difficulty were those requiring recognition and 
evaluation of language devices such as irony and symbolism, as well as evaluating the use of connotative 
language and the choice of style in relation to the author‘s intention. The mean on this paper was 55 per 
cent compared to 64 per cent in 2011 and 57 per cent in 2010. 
Paper 02 — Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1 
This question required candidates to demonstrate skills in understanding, organization and expression. The 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific discussions, 
analyses) suitable to the secondary school age-group. The skills of selection and concise expression are 
targeted. The specific objectives are detailed in the syllabus under Understanding (a) and (b) and Expression 
(a), (b), (c). Included in the syllabus is the following advice: Summaries require economy of language, the 
careful selection of the relevant main ideas, and the preservation of the intention of the original (page 11).
The passage selected for May/June 2012 was considered to be well within the reading abilities of candidates. 
It was taken from a magazine article and required that candidate summarize a person‘s reflection on a very 
topical matter. The content focused on the nature of modern living, its negative consequences, and possible 
ways to avoid such consequences. The content of the passage was perceived to be familiar to candidates at 
this level, but many of them distorted the meaning of the passage or gave their own views on the topic. 
Only the very competent candidates managed to capture all the points made. 
Weakness in selecting the crucial elements was exacerbated by lack of vocabulary when candidates 
attempted to use their own language. The age-old error of ‗lifting‘ persists, and judging from the prevalence 
and persistence of this problem, it appears strongly that students are being taught to lift. This report draws 
attention to plagiarism, and stresses how vital it is for candidates to stay clear of the practice. A significant 
contributor to the candidates‘ difficulty is the apparent belief that the topic sentence of a paragraph must 
always come at the start of the paragraph. This belief is wrong and following it causes candidates to focus 
on minor features. As in the past, few candidates were able to maintain the correct relationships while 
reorganizing their points for brevity. They continued to cling steadfastly to both the pattern and the 
language of the original, a strategy that will work against conciseness. Candidates can be helped to learn 
how to. 
- 3 -
 differentiate between topic and supporting sentences 
 recognize the relationship between main points (cause and effect, solutions, alternatives) 
 distinguish between explanations, illustrations, etc. and the main point 
 determine when explanation is vital to good summary 
 test their summaries for over-generalization. 
The nature of summary (of the length required from candidates in the examination) is such that it eliminates 
all topic sentences, combining the information into a general thought (thesis). The candidate should 
therefore produce a single coherent paragraph. A close look at the syllabus section, Notes and Suggested 
Activities (specifically pages 6–12), will help both teacher and student to identify and hone summary skills. 
Strong support is also given in the new Nelson Thornes CXC English A Study Guide. 
Section B: Comprehension
Section B is designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one expository. The 
skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) (pages 2–3). Each passage has a 
different focus: in the expository type of passage the objectives are outlined in (a) and (b); in the other –
literary discourse – the greater number of questions satisfy Understanding (c). The results for Question 2 
strongly suggest that reading and analysing writing of a literary nature needs to be given more attention. 
Pages 12–14 of the syllabus should be invaluable. Where questions require information obvious in the text, 
candidates gain marks, but fail to read between the lines, understand inference, purpose, techniques, and 
connotative language. These are areas which need to be stressed, as in the ‗real-life‘ situation, the ability to 
penetrate the meaning of the written or spoken word is vital. Candidates with a weakness in responding to 
this kind of passage also find the Summary question very challenging. The mean on this question was 11 
out of 30 marks. 
Question 2 
The selection for this question was a brief extract from a novel by Rosa Guy. The questions set followed the 
specific objectives of Understanding (c). This aspect of the syllabus is detailed on page 3 of the syllabus, 
with explanations and examples starting on page 12 (Notes and suggested activities). Questions asked for 
supporting quotations, recognition of atmosphere, inference to be drawn from a sequence of behaviours, and 
evidence. This question was poorly answered. Candidates scored marks on questions where the answers 
were obvious (Questions (a) and (g)). Questions that required an interpretation and the recognition of 
writer‘s intent posed difficulties. Students should be encouraged to satisfy the requirements of questions —
for example, ―quote the sentence…‖ saw responses which quoted a few words. 
Question 3 
The content of this extract dealt with retirement savings: the relevance of financial literacy and the 
instituting of plans. This information was also within the experience and interest of the candidates. It lent 
itself well to factual questions, but also included questions requiring higher order skills — deduction and 
inferencing. The performance on this question was significantly better than on Question 2. Here again, 
questions that required candidates to draw inferences were challenging: for example, (f) required candidates 
to deduce the point that was being made; (h) tested candidates‘ understanding of the message in the last 
sentence, and to find the sentence near the start which gave the opposite view. Candidates experienced 
difficulty in providing precise answers. Many candidates showed an inability to differentiate between 
contextual meanings and literal meanings, treating both in the same ways, as in the case of ‗roadblocks‘ in 
Question (e). As in Question 2, there is the tendency by many candidates to cite several sentences to answer 
a question when a word or phrase is required. In Question (g), for example, many candidates gave 
unnecessary or contradictory information. The mean on this question was 8 out of 15 marks. 
- 4 -
Section C: Story Writing 
Of the three questions in this section, most candidates attempted Question 5. Question 6 was the least 
popular choice. Some excellent responses were generated from all topics. However, most responses were 
quite mundane. The use of Standard English still proves to be a challenge for too many candidates, with 
obvious interference from the creoles and dialects used in the region. Many stories were poor in using the 
elements of story writing. Students must be advised that use of the stimulus is a requirement. They must 
also be encouraged to take careful note of the rubric. 
Question 4 
This question used a picture of a young man, sitting under a tree, with a laptop computer on his lap as a 
stimulus. Around him is an array of books, some of them being study texts for CXC. Candidates seemed 
generally comfortable with the picture stimulus, but it did not give rise to any out-of-the-ordinary responses. 
Story lines tended to be similar and generally predictable. Unfortunately, some candidates failed to carry 
out the designated task and instead produced essays on ideas like the value of computers/technology in 
education. For candidates who have not learnt to discriminate among the different genres, the picture still 
proved to be a problem. The mean on this question was 13 out of 35 marks. 
Question 5 
Question 5 used as stimulus, the idea of a storm and the urgent need to warn people who were seen as being 
special. Very good responses came from candidates who used ‗storm‘ metaphorically. This approach 
allowed creativity and freshness. While most candidates attempted this question, it proved challenging for 
the following reasons: many candidates seemed confused by the tense and first person narration of the 
stimulus. These could not transition smoothly into their stories, so the beginning was used almost as a topic. 
There were many instances of confusion created by changes in point of view. Too often, there was little 
connection between the beginning and the content of the story. The mean on this question was 14 out of 35 
marks. 
Question 6 
Descriptive writing is a challenge for a large number of candidates. Most often, too few descriptive details 
are employed and too many responses are mainly narrative with some description. Candidates should be 
encouraged to help the audience to ‗see‘ the situation through the details they give. Most candidates who 
attempted this question still needed the framework of a narrative in which the description was incorporated. 
This is an acceptable approach to the question, since writing ‗pure‘ description can be quite challenging. 
Problems arose when candidates simply told stories with no attempt to describe. Yet, there were a few 
candidates who demonstrated competent descriptive writing techniques and produced interesting and lively 
writing, as the question ―was it real or science fiction?‖ triggered a wide variety of ideas. 
Section D: Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
The topics were well within the knowledge of candidates, and some very good work emerged. Nevertheless, 
as has been seen in the past, too many responses lacked adequate and well reasoned arguments/points and 
the requisite and appropriate argumentative devices to convince or persuade their audience. Question 8 was
the more popular, but better responses were written to Question 7. 
Question 7 required candidates to write an essay supporting the views of either of the following speakers: 
 
Speaker A: The government should cut subjects like Music and Visual Arts from the curriculum to save 
money in these hard economic times. 
Speaker B: No way! I think the government should find other ways to solve economic problems! 
- 5 -
In general, candidates tended to go off-track in Question 7. The more competent candidates made the link 
between solving the economic crisis without removing the subjects from the curriculum. Many candidates 
completely disregarded the economic factor and dealt only with the value of the Arts in education. 
These answers were reasonably good. Weaker essays dealt with education generally, or with what 
governments should do generally. The mean on this question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
Question 8 required a strong argument supporting or opposing the moot — ―Education is the only avenue 
for success in today‘s world‖. There was much rambling and narration of anecdotes, rather than a focus on 
arguing the point. More careful reading and attention to the thrust of the topic ―Education is the only 
avenue…‖ was needed. The mean on this question was 13 out of 35 marks. 
Recommendations for Teachers
 The quality of answers in Argument suggests that time management is an issue for many candidates. 
The main evidence of this is the extended length of answers for Section C, followed by short, 
unplanned and therefore poor quality arguments. Students would benefit from some coaching in how 
to manage their time.
 
 The problem in Section C is partly caused by unawareness of the elements of short story, and of 
effective ways to use the strategies that will develop the stories. Students need experience in editing to 
get rid of details which do not help the story. For example, students will give a long list of friends 
who attended a party when those friends have nothing to do with the outcome; or they will spend time 
describing a morning when they need to focus on the night the event took place. 
 The points following have been made before, but bear repeating in this report since they persist. 
 It is clear that large numbers of students across the Caribbean have not mastered the use of Standard 
English. There continues to be interference from dialects and patois used throughout the region; to 
these have been added the slangs originating from dancehall music and the North American ghettos 
and the abbreviations familiar to users of the messaging media of modern technology. For students 
who almost abhor reading, some methods must be found to encourage correct use of the language. 
 Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when summarizing 
and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their responses into a coherent 
whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to introduce these words into the active vocabulary 
of students. Practice in construction shifts and equivalent sentences would be useful. 
 The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both require 
thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
 Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words and sentences 
work in the language is important. 
 Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through exposure — if necessary, in class 
– to the reading of good literature. This includes focusing their attention to paragraphing, grammar, 
spelling, diction and other conventions of writing. 
 Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story writing and 
descriptive writing. 
 Greater use should be made of literature to teach writing — immersion into how stories work. 
 Strategies should be engaged to provide individual help to students so that individual needs can be 
addressed. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2013
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Overall, performance was moderate. There was a marked absence of superior scripts at one end, and also 
only a few incompetent scripts at the other. There was noticeable improvement in the Comprehension 
profile, but the Expression profile remained only fair, with only two per cent of candidates scoring 
Grade I on this profile. Candidates are encouraged to do more critical reading and discussion. As 
suggested last year, opportunities for more in-class reading and discussion should be created and geared 
to studying how writers say things and why. Such activities, through the use of a good model, provide 
candidates with an opportunity to widen their experiences. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple-Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. Approximately 80 per cent of the candidates received Grades 
I–III. Good performance was evidenced on Questions 1–20 which assessed grammar and mechanics of 
writing. Performance on the questions set on the literary passages was markedly better than on those set 
on the expository and persuasive texts. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
This section requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and to reproduce its meaning concisely 
and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak scripts usually indicate 
major problems with understanding of the passage, and with ability to express meaning in the candidate’s 
own words (synthesis). Too many candidates try to get by with lifting chunks of text, ‘cutting and 
pasting’ them together, and adding an occasional word or phrase. The latter is a poor attempt to hide the 
fact that they are reproducing the words of the passage. We advise that teaching should concentrate on 
helping students to grasp and reproduce meaning. Learning activities should include: 
 exercises in equivalent sentences — this can be extended beyond one sentence to a paragraph. 
 practice in comprehension that involves interpretation of meaning (not just rewording) executed 
both orally and in writing. 
The following is extracted from the January 2012 report and repeated here because it is crucial: 
Summary teaching involves two major processes: information gathering (reading, 
identifying, choosing and interpreting what is relevant) and information giving 
(synthesizing, organizing and writing). Teaching must move beyond 'identifying points' to 
include in summary to understanding how the text is written. Focusing on text 
organizational patterns such as cause and effect, problem and solution, before and after 
and similar developmental strategies, can lead students to greater comprehension and 
synthesis of information before they begin to write. 
3 
Question 1 
This summary question is awarded total marks of 30, evenly distributed under three headings: 
 Understanding (Content) 
 Organization 
 Expression 
Answers suggested that the text was well understood. The contents dealt with the appearance or reality of 
physical fitness. It noted that one could be deceived into seeing muscular structure as fitness, when in 
reality, many muscular persons were using anabolic steroids. These persons had the benefit of looks, but 
the passage told of the dangers of steroid use, and challenged persons to be sensible in their choices. 
In the area of Understanding, students continue to score well, but there are persistent problems with 
Expression and Organization. The language of the text (apart from the permitted use of technical 
expressions) is, most often, lifted, so that candidates score low marks. It seems to be the norm to ignore
the instruction use your own words as far as possible. Candidates still continue to ignore the prescribed 
length for the summary, despite repeated warnings that marks will be lost, although answers showed some 
improvement. The need to go over the limit suggests that candidates are not as capable as they might be, 
in organizing their thoughts, so they can expect a lower mark under Organization. Most candidates 
appear to have been encouraged to use the order of ideas given in the text. Only a few, usually those in 
the superior range, show enough understanding to group statements according to relationship, and so 
produce succinct and accurate summaries. 
Satisfactory answers to this question 
 recognized the deception of appearing fit 
 recognized the willingness to take shortcuts to appear fit 
 pointed out the dangers: physical, psychological and social 
 cautioned those who would like to be fit to make intelligent choices. 
If candidates are to better develop their skills, they need: 
 extensive practice in organizing their answers, using transition words to help themselves and the
reader with understanding 
 to practise vocabulary exercises which help them to use simple, correct language 
 reminders that reusing the words of the passage entirely (whether in its entirety, selected chunks or 
by joining phrases from all over) attracts no marks — as they would not have presented any language 
of their own for assessment
 engagement in more close-reading exercises, paying attention to recognizing tone/attitude and the 
writer's intention 
 to engage in exercises in which analysing the internal structure of passages is emphasized 
 instruction in how paragraph cohesion is achieved, and in the use of appropriate transitional and 
connective expressions. 
4 
Section B: Understanding 
Question 2 
This question, which is worth 15 marks, was a poem. Candidates responded fairly well to the questions 
set on the poem. This is a departure from what is generally experienced when a poem is presented. The 
individual parts of the question that proved challenging or problematic for Question 2 were (d), (e) and 
(f). 
Part (d) required an understanding of language use – purpose and style. Part (e) asked for reaction, and 
candidates failed to distinguish between feeling and action/reaction. 
In Part (f) both expressions that represented contrast were needed to demonstrate that contrast, and many 
candidates were not able to indicate both. 
Question 3 
This question was an expository piece discussing treatment of and reaction to global warming. Given that 
the passage dealt with an issue which should be familiar to candidates, the responses were disappointing. 
The average mark out of 15 was 5. Many candidates could not respond appropriately to the expressions: 
political football and fiddled with. The strong suggestion is that although they can recognize metaphorical 
language from the diction (mechanically) they are not able to penetrate the meaning of the expression and 
its value in the text. Responses also suggested that candidates are unable to read questions correctly —
they ignore some words, misinterpret others, or simply do not understand what the question is asking. 
This indicates that apart from reading and discussing various texts, candidates need to be given practice in 
interpretation, and in recognizing key words that would reduce the chance of irrelevancies. 
The teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined with the teaching of summary writing as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. Summary writing goes another step but 
understanding is the first stage. It is suggested that students be helped to be more focused on 
interpretation, more concerned with answering what is actually asked, rather than what is usually asked. 
As with Section A, much practice is advised in reading, listening, and reproducing meaning; in 
interpreting meaning at different levels; and in paying attention to accuracy. Developing sensitivity to 
how words and sentences work in the language is important, so that candidates rise above the level of 
seeing comprehension as guesswork. It is strongly recommended that teachers return to and apply 
Bloom’s (revised) Taxonomy, (for example), in developing questions. 
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
Following the now familiar pattern, there were three stimuli: Question 4, the picture; Question 5, the 
narrative prompt; Question 6, a descriptive essay responding to a specific setting. Question 5 was the 
most popular question, with twice as many candidates as those responding to Question 4, and three times 
as many as those choosing Question 6. 
Questions 4–5 
These questions are marked out of 35. The majority of the stories fell into range 3, with averages ranging
between 14 and 15 marks. 
5 
In Question 4, most candidates were able to use the stimulus satisfactorily, although the stories were not 
particularly strong. The stimulus to the narrative, Question 5, was also reasonably incorporated, although 
some candidates did little in constructing character, or meaningfully using the strategies of storytelling. 
Question 6 
In general, this question was not well done as candidates had a poor grasp of the requirements, and failed
to interpret the stimulus appropriately. Answers continue to be highly narrative. The majority of 
candidates do not grasp the need for descriptive details to create focus and are very weak in organizing 
movement of description. They demonstrate a lack of use of descriptive words and ability to create 
images, so visualization and interest are missing, and candidates resort to narrative. 
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
Question 7 
This question invited candidates to support or oppose the view that As long as government is paying for 
my education, it can tell me what to study. There were far-ranging interpretations, including: that the 
government could tell the candidate what specifically to study for the examination; the pros and cons of 
government-sponsored education; the right to freedom of choice. The question was the more popular 
choice, but the answers were generally poorly handled. 
Question 8 
This question asked candidates to express their views on the statement that A single Caribbean team 
should represent the region in all international sporting competitions. This statement lent itself to fewer 
interpretations. Examiners felt that candidates were unsure of the meaning of the term region. 
Recommendations 
 Planning: The rubrics which introduce each section of the examination paper invite candidates to 
plan their longer responses. This was often interpreted as ‘write the essay, then copy it’. This 
double-writing affects time negatively, and many answers showed the hurry to complete. Some 
candidates also failed to cross out the unwanted answer. The preparation for the examination 
should include the skill of outlining, so the candidate can make maximum use of the time.
 Language Use: The quality of language generally, but particularly in the questions which 
demand longer continuous answers (Questions 1, 4/5/6; 7/8) raises some concern: shifting tenses, 
lack of discrimination in past tenses, lack of subject and verb agreement, basic punctuation and 
spelling errors are all persistent problems. Very often, rereading reduces the number and type of
errors, and students should be taught how, and encouraged to reread critically. 
 Examiners advise that much more effort should be put into helping candidates to improve their 
stock of adjectives and adverbs, and to provide opportunities for studying and emulating good 
descriptive pieces. 
 Most candidates are exposed to the visual through television. This can be used constructively to 
help develop the skill of descriptive writing. Candidates may be invited to role-play, to be the 
camera or camera person. They should become familiar with the concepts of foreground, middle 
distance and background; with the techniques of panning and focusing; and helped to distinguish 
between concrete and abstract words and phrases. 
6 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have been prepared to write their argumentative 
essays along specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while 
some students do benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the 
risk that competent and even superior students will be forced into a mould which affects their 
expression and development negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and 
provide them with a variety of ways to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2013 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
- 2 - 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance overall this year was fair. Approximately 58 per cent of the candidates achieved Grades 
I to III. This was an increase over 2012 when the percentage of candidates who achieved this level 
was 47. Performance on the Expression profile continues to be only moderate with only four per cent 
of candidates achieved Grade I on this profile. Students must be engaged in the myriad of ways in 
which language is used. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. The trend of good performance on the items assessing 
vocabulary, and grammar was again evident. Performance in comprehension questions based on 
literary, informative and persuasive passages was fair. Items which caused difficulty included those 
relating to recognizing and assessing the use of devices, recognizing mood, tone and style and 
distinguishing between the author’s attitude and attitudes of characters
Paper 02 – Free Responses 
SECTION A 
Question 1 
Analysis of this section has frequently appealed to teachers and students to pay more attention to it. 
The responses for July marking 2013 demonstrate some improvement, and suggest that the entreaties 
have been recognised.
- 3 - 
The passage to be summarised was an article entitled ‘Water’ adapted from Global Environment 
Outlook for Youth in the Caribbean – A Vision for Change! The passage highlighted the current 
situation in which the world is in imminent danger of water shortage, partly because water is taken for 
granted in some places while the supply is abused in others. The world does in fact does have 
sufficient water for all, but modern management measures must be employed to ensure continued 
world supply. The passage also points out the importance of water supply to economic prosperity, and 
indeed to the well being of human society.
This section was allotted 30 marks distributed evenly in 3 areas under Profiles 1 and 2. 
PROFILE 1 PROFILE 2
Content
(understanding) 
10 MARKS 
Organistion
10 MARKS 
Language 
10 MARKS 
Content 
 There was improvement with regard to meeting the word limit and attempting the question. 
 The vast majority of candidates understood well that the passage was about water supply. 
They also picked up on the inadequacy of current conservation strategies and the need to 
ensure that water would be available for future generations. Despite their understanding of 
these key issues, some candidates lost marks in Area 1 because they were unable to express 
said issues accurately and coherently with respect to the original passage. E.g. in the 
statement: 
“At the global scale there is enough water to provide water security for 
socioeconomic, technical and institutional aspect of water use” 
- 4 - 
Students seemed to have recognised and understood the point but repeated the words
“At the…security”, and then copied the last part: “for socioeconomic … water use” 
out of context because they did not grasp the correct relationship. 
The following are some of the distortions noted: 
 the scarcity of water was seen as a present reality but not as a future crisis, so in many cases 
there was no reference to the looming water crisis 
 water shortage was misinterpreted and referred to as water storage 
 ‘forecast’ (para 2) was aligned to weather reports. 
 attempts to meet the word limit by using telegraphic language resulting in incoherent 
responses. 
Superior responses demonstrated excellence in reproducing the critical elements of the original 
passage in the candidate’s own words, most often in flawless or near flawless language. In a few 
instances responses indicated a superior understanding of content but some weakness in language. 
Responses assessed as suggesting or demonstrating incompetence included one or more of the 
following: 
 The introduction of extraneous material based on prior knowledge, both technical and casual. 
 Misinformation prompted by imperfect understanding of details. E.g. “While a political 
commitment is not simple, we must demand it.” This was entirely out of context and based 
on two sentences in the original: “The best initiatives are those that make a political 
commitment to consider water as an integral part of sustainable human development...”; 
“There is no quick fix or simple solution when it comes to safeguarding and managing a 
resource that is in as much demand as water.”  Incomplete ideas. 
- 5 - 
Organization 
The passages used for examination purposes are paragraphed. They follow the principles of 
paragraphing: a topic sentence and a number of supporting sentences. In writing summary, students 
are taught to recognise the topic sentence in each paragraph, and to use the meanings generated from 
them to create a generalized piece of writing. This suggests that the length of the piece they submit 
will not allow the use of paragraphs. This is a concept grasped and demonstrated by the superior 
student, and the understanding of the generalization principle is important for all students if they are 
to improve their skills in summary. 
Superior responses were easily recognizable due to the smooth transition from one thought to the 
other and the demonstrated ability of the candidate to re-arrange the original passage into a coherent 
whole while maintaining its perspective, purpose, tone, as well as sense of audience without losing 
content. 
Responses at a low level of competence follow the paragraphing of the original slavishly. They do not 
recognise the relationship between points that do not follow each other in the original. They generally 
show a passive understanding of some sentences and phrases in the extract and reproduce these 
verbatim. Examples of this in the paper under review include: 
 At the global scale, there is enough water to provide “water security” for all...
 The scarcity of water is a very relative concept... 
 A basket of factors including socioeconomic, technical and institutional aspects of water 
use... 
 Sustainable human development...
 Inequitable distribution of water...
 Our managerial capacity has to be upgraded... 
Included below are the salient points of the passage, and one of the sample summaries used to 
standardize the marking. 
- 6 - 
 Water is vital to all aspects of life and human activity. It is often taken for granted and its 
value is overlooked. 
 Water scarcity means different things in different places but everywhere it relates to a 
country’s economic and social activities and to people’s attitudes to water.
 World shortage is not actual because there is really enough water for all, but the threat is 
caused by careless attitudes, outdated management of resources, and waste. The impact is 
that a very large portion of the world will face real scarcity by 2025. 
 Attention must be given to the problem in order to ensure that future generations have water 
and that the needs of the poor are addressed.
 The solution will come from a change in our attitude to water use, the appropriate valuing of 
water, and the employment of updated management strategies. 
Sample summary: 
People today seldom think of water shortage; however, it is predicted that by 2025 this could be a 
reality for billions. The crisis will not result from real water scarcity, but from poor management and 
attitudes. Addressing the problem means considering all factors related to water use. Water is 
critical to each country’s economic and cultural well being, and ideal practices must focus on 
sustainable human development and the reduction of poverty. If water is to be distributed equitably 
we have to recognise its value and the need to conserve for the future. The answer will not be found 
easily, and requires that management practices be updated to meet modern requirements. 
 (111 words) 
Advice to Teachers 
Judging from the relatively few instances of ‘no response’ to Section A, students are more willing to 
attempt summary writing. However, they continue to be hindered in their efforts by inadequate 
vocabulary which affects both comprehension and summary production. There is also low/no use of 
- 7 - 
connectives resulting in summaries that read more like lists of bulleted items than continuous prose. 
Generally speaking, however, there has been improvement in candidates’ ability to meet the demands 
of this section. Following are some suggestions to keep the improvement going: 
 Introduce summary writing early – some students need to start in the first year of secondary 
school, particularly if their reading levels are not up to required standard. 
 Constantly reinforce vocabulary and effective punctuation. 
 Give students practice in writing within a specified word limit. 
 Provide students with activities aimed at understanding and using appropriate connectives. 
 Provide students with activities aimed at mastering interpretation and construction shift. 
 Encourage students to use their own word; discourage lifting from original passages. 
SECTION B
In keeping with the specifications of the syllabus and the design of the Specimen Paper, poetry can be 
used on Paper 2, and in Paper 1. Analysis of the results in this year’s examinations indicated that the 
two stimuli used created a good balance.
Question 2 
In this section candidates were able to benefit from the allocation of marks for partial answers. The 
allocation of marks allowed candidates to score 1 point on questions with a full score of 2 marks. On 
the other hand, candidates lost marks when they failed to be specific as required, or put answers 
which required the examiner to select the correct response. 
- 8 - 
The poem “Carrion Crows” was within the candidates’ experience. They clearly understood what the 
poem was about. Candidates were aware that there were negative and positive aspects about the 
behavior of the crows themselves, but not all were able to make these distinctions between the crows' 
attitude, the poet's attitude, and the poet's craft. It was evident that a few candidates found Questions 
(d) and (g) challenging because they lacked the vocabulary to describe what they knew. These 
questions required understanding of the terms “effect” and “attitude”. On the other hand, the answers 
to (a) (b) and (c) which required explicitly stated information, were generally correct. Some 
candidates seemed unsure of what to identify specifically as alliteration and metaphor, and quoted the 
entire line in which the device was used: " And I have seen them perched on paling post" as opposed 
to "perched on paling post". 
Question 3 
There were a few “No Responses” for individual parts of this question, possibly because of poor time 
management, and also because questions demanded interpretation and deduction. Question (h), “what 
action concerning the environment would be recommended to the government of Socrato based on the 
information in the last paragraph”, was one such question. Most candidates listed recommendations 
that were based on what the passage stated as problems: for example some recommended that over 
fishing and excess road building should stop. The weaker candidates made recommendations about
environmental issues that the passage/paragraph did not address. The better candidates, it seems, were 
either in command of effective comprehension strategies, and were able to make recommendations 
with more far-reaching effects on the environment such as “Be careful about development which 
disturbs and destroys the natural environment”.
Advice to Teachers
 It is recommended that teachers pay closer attention to writer's techniques, attitudes and 
purpose, and to commenting on the effectiveness of devices used. 
- 9 - 
 Candidates still need practice in quoting relevant and specific phrases and identifying key 
words. 
 Candidates require more help in determining what specific questions ask, so that their 
responses may be specific. 
SECTION C
Question 4 
Although the story based on the picture is not usually very popular with candidates, this year it was 
the one which most candidates attempted. Perhaps this was because most candidates would have been 
familiar with the scenario, even if only vicariously. Perhaps because of this familiarity, many 
candidates did not seem to have worked very hard to produce interesting responses. Most were 
therefore simple, very similar, predictable narratives which lacked creativity. 
Question 5 
Of the two questions set for story-writing this proved the more challenging. Many candidates 
experienced difficulty incorporating the sentences into their answers. Skilled candidates responded to 
the stimulus in effective, interesting ways. This does not suggest that the question was too difficult: 
candidates writing this examination should be able to cope competently with a question like this. 
Unfortunately this stimulus was seen by many as an opportunity to produce television-styled violence 
instead of effective characterization and meaningful conflict. 
- 10 - 
Question 6
This question required a descriptive essay based on the stimulus “It was all done; all the groups were 
sure that nothing more could be added. Emotions were mixed as we quietly studied that large room. 
Describe the scenes and reactions you saw.”
Although more candidates have a clearer understanding of the requirements of a descriptive essay 
than previously, the number of responses remains in the minority. The problems persist: 
 Most candidates who attempted the question were unable to differentiate between a 
descriptive essay and a story. Even when there was description, it was bound to particular 
characters or locations in the narrative.
 There was again misinterpretation of the question so many responses were weak or irrelevant. 
Many candidates did not see or did not understand “It was all done;” or could not figure out 
how it was important to the response. 
There is concern about the significant amount of interference from local creoles/dialects on the 
Standard English of large numbers of candidates writing this exam. Examples of this interference 
were again seen in areas such as the non-marking of past tenses, weak spelling, and the use of 
pronouns which have no antecedents. 
Other problems with the mechanics of the language continue to be evident; for example; 
 punctuation, especially in run-on sentences - perhaps this problem is indicative of a more 
serious issue: lack of understanding of sentence structure. 
 non-use of paragraphs - many candidates write pages of the story in one long unbroken 
block. 
- 11 - 
Advice to Teachers
 There is a pressing need to deal with the issues of (1) relevance, (2) singularity of event, and 
to a lesser extent (3) point of view, so that candidates may better meet the requirements of 
length and focus in their stories. 
 Candidates are asked in this section to use Standard English to respond to a particular 
stimulus. Candidates need to be encouraged to be self critical where relevance is 
concerned. Weak candidates and those with a low level of competence tend to write 
pages of script before getting to the point of the response. The importance of ‘point of 
view’ and the need to control it must be emphasized so that clarity of the plot is 
maintained. 
SECTION D
Questions 7 & 8 
Overall, there were improvements in the use of language -grammar and mechanics in particular, in 
comparison to previous years. With regard to time management, this year it seems that more 
candidates answered the questions. There were fewer incidents of "No Response". Despite the 
shortcomings of some candidates who answered the questions in letter format or in the narrative form, 
it was clear that most candidates understood the concept of persuasive writing and used devices and 
transitions as needed. 
The questions to which candidates responded are below. 
Question 7 
“Government should offer free health care for everyone residing in a country, 
nationals and non-nationals alike.”
- 12 - 
Write an essay EITHER supporting OR opposing this view. 
Question 8 
“School principals should consult with the student body on ALL matters affecting the 
lives of the students.” 
Write an essay giving your views on this statement. 
Question 7 
 Some candidates misinterpreted the term ‘non-national’, and either ignored or did not 
understand the word 'residing' - which should have given them the hint as to what "non￾national ' meant. 
 Some candidates did not define the key terms from the chosen stimulus, while other had 
incorrect definitions. 
 Little or no supporting evidence was given for the perspectives being given in the essay. 
 Many students agreed that health care should be free but did not present clear arguments 
that demonstrated the benefits of such a venture. 
 A few candidates interpreted the word "country" to mean a rural area, rather than their 
home territory.
 Question 8 
 Many candidates misinterpreted the term "student body" to mean the Students' Council or the 
students' physical bodies. 
 The word "consult" created some ambiguity which resulted in various interpretations . 
Common among these interpretations, was the notion that "consult" referred to the principal's 
role as counselor. 
 The expression ‘all matters' was not handled effectively. 
- 13 - 
 The points posited by candidates were generally not well developed. There was an absence of 
supporting details or appropriate rhetorical devices. Some candidates merely listed the issues 
without any attempt to argue how consultation would address these issues. 
 Most of the issues identified were home related such as divorce, violence and abuse. 
Advice to Teachers
 There continues to be significant concern that too many candidates have sentence 
construction challenges: sentence splices; hanging sentences; fragments; and run-on 
sentences. Many used the vernacular of their countries. 
 Instruction may benefit from the use of more class discussions in which students are 
challenge to say WHY they hold their perspectives. 
 Opportunity to critique written arguments from well-known persons or good Internet sources 
should go some way in encouraging better understanding and production of argument. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
PROFILE CUT-OFFS
[WEIGHTED]
JANUARY 2013 
PROFILE 01 
(MAX = 76) 
GRADES SCORE
PROFILE 02 
(MAX = 114) 
GRADES SCORE
I 52 (68%) I 71 (65%) 
II 44 (58%) II 60 (53%) 
III 35 (46%) III 51 (45%) 
IV 27(36%) IV 39 (34%) 
V 13 (17%) V 17 (15%) 
VI <13 VI <17 
COMPOSITE CUT-OFFS
[WEIGHTED]
GRADES COMPOSITE CUT-OFF
I 123 (65%) 
II 104 (55%) 
III 86 (45%) 
IV 66 (35%) 
V 30 (16%)
VI <16 
2 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
QUESTION CUT-OFFS BY PROFILE 
PAPER 02
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
PROFILE 1 PROFILE 2
GRADES GRADES
I II III IV V VI I II III IV V VI
1. 7 6 5 4 2 <2 13 11 9 7 3 <3
2. 11 9 7 6 3 <3 NOT APPLICABLE
3. 11 9 7 6 3 <3 NOT APPLICABLE
4. 
NOT APPLICABLE
22 18 15 12 5 <5
5. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
6. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
7. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
8. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
PAPER CUT-OFFS
[RAW] 
PAPER 01 
(60) 
GRADES SCORE
PAPER 02 
(130) 
GRADES SCORE
I 39 (65%) I 54 (41.5%) 
II 34 (56.6%) II 47 (36.1%) 
III 29 (48.3%) III 38 (29.2%) 
IV 23 (38.3%) IV 31 (23.84%) 
V 20 (33.3%) V 11 (8.4%) 
VI <20 VI <11 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
TABLE OF SPECIFICATIONS 
PAPER 01 – GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
Number Objective Cognitive Level Question 
Number Objective Cognitive Level 
1. UA Application 31. UC Comprehension
2. UA Application 32. UC Comprehension
3. UA Application 33. UC Comprehension
4. UA Application 34. UC Comprehension
5. UA Application 35. UC Comprehension
6. UA Application 36. UC Comprehension
7. UA Application 37. UC Comprehension
8. UA Application 38. UC Comprehension
9. UA Application 39. UC Comprehension
10. UA Application 40. UD Comprehension
11. UA Application 41. UD Comprehension
12. UA Application 42. UD Comprehension
13. UA Application 43. UD Comprehension
14. UA Application 44. UD Comprehension
15. UA Application 45. UD Comprehension
16. UA Application 46. UB Comprehension
17. UA Application 47. UB Comprehension
18. UA Application 48. UB Comprehension
19. UA Application 49. UB Comprehension
20. UA Application 50. UB Comprehension
21. UC Comprehension 51. UB Comprehension
22. UC Comprehension 52. UB Comprehension
23. UC Comprehension 53. UB Comprehension
24. UC Comprehension 54. UB Comprehension
25. UC Comprehension 55. UD Comprehension
26. UC Comprehension 56. UD Comprehension
27. UC Comprehension 57. UD Comprehension
28. UC Comprehension 58. UD Comprehension
29. UC Comprehension 59. UD Comprehension
30. UC Comprehension 60. UD Comprehension
60 questions – 1 mark each 
Profile assessed – Understanding 
Total UA – 20
Total UB – 9 
Total UC – 19
Total UD – 12
Total 
40 – Comprehension 
20 – Application 
2 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
TABLE OF SPECIFICATIONS 
PAPER 02 – GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
Number Profile and Marks Awarded Syllabus 
Objective Cognitive Level 
1. Understanding – 10 marks 
Expression – 20 marks 
UB Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
2. (a) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
 (b) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
 (c) Understanding – 1 mark UC Application 
(d) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension
(e) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension
(f) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
(g) Understanding – 2 marks UC Application 
 (h) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
(i) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
3. (a) Understanding – 1 mark UB Comprehension
(b) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension
 (c) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (d) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (e) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
(f) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
(g) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (h) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
4. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis
5. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
6. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
7. Expression – 35 marks UD Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
8. Expression – 35 marks UD Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
Understanding – 40 marks
Expression 195 marks (Total expression marks candidates can achieve on this paper is 90) 
Cognitive Levels 
Comprehension – 15 
Application – 2 
Comprehension/Application/Synthesis – 5 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
 EXAMINATION 
JANUARY 2014 
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance in January 2014 compared favourably with the results in earlier years. As has come to be 
the norm, there was neither an outstanding improvement, nor significant decline, but the results continued 
to be skewed towards the lower grades. The incidence of candidates being wholly unprepared for the 
examination was again relatively small, yet most responses tended to fall into the category of being 
‘adequate’. Teachers are urged to make use of the various guidelines and aids to learning being 
developed by the Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC), to help students be more comfortable with 
both language and literature, and to improve language through the skills acquired in studying literature. 
One resource is the syllabus document, in which there is a large section which helps with interpreting the 
syllabus objectives and requirements, and suggests a variety of activities which can help in developing the 
appropriate skills. 
Taken as a whole, there is some improvement in the performance, but individual questions as expected, 
show fluctuations in quality. Candidates seem to lack strategies to help them use their time and skills to 
the best advantage under examination conditions. At the start of each question there are instructions and 
cautions to which examination candidates need to be encouraged to give thoughtful and careful attention. 
The following advice was among several pieces offered to instructors in 2009, and is still very relevant 
today: 
Students should come to the examination with a well-rehearsed procedure for tackling 
each question…they should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure for identifying 
the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is 
especially important in writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and 
in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each student, based on the 
student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy 
under examination conditions. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was good. Approximately 84 per cent of candidates received Grades I–III. 
Exercises on word choice, sentence completion and equivalent sentences were well done. The area in 
which greatest weakness was evident was usage where candidates experienced difficulty recognizing 
sentences which contained clichés, misused metaphors or redundancies, and sentences that were incorrect 
grammatically. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
This section of the paper — summary — tests skills which people generally use daily in summing up 
responses to life’s experiences. It is an academic activity therefore which has practical value, and 
3 
students might respond better to the challenges of summary if teachers remember to teach for the transfer 
of skills. Discussions with persons approaching tertiary level academic pursuits, and with many in the 
work sector, indicate that there is a strong tendency to confuse the strategies — paraphrasing, quoting and 
summarizing. 
There are also observations that while secondary level students are required to research and produce 
scholarly evidence, the manner of presentation accepted is very often sheer plagiarism. The plagiarized 
presentation delivers the impression that the student is low in understanding. For this reason teachers are 
encouraged to explore with the students the Skills and Abilities to be Assessed as presented in the 
syllabus document: Understanding (a) and (b) (i) to (x), and (d) (i) and (ii); Expression (a) and (b). 
Question 1 
Among the comments which examiners and assistant examiners made on the passage and task were: 
 The instructions given to the question clearly indicated what was expected of candidates. 
 Candidates seemed able to relate well to the passage as the issues addressed were within their 
experience. 
 The level of vocabulary in the passage was not unduly challenging. 
 The length was suitable to the time frame allowed. 
Comments made on the candidates’ responses included the following:
Strengths 
 General understanding of the passage 
 The ability to identify key points 
 Organization of material 
Weaknesses 
 Using transitional devices 
 Creating accuracy because of some inability to interpret or express relationships 
 Far too much lifting of phrases and sentences rather than using their own words 
 General expression 
The points expected in the summary were: 
 The 1990s widespread encouragement of lower income persons to enter university has led to 
disappointment and frustration. 
 Governments cannot maintain the costs. 
 Students entering university have unrealistic hopes and expectations from the degrees. 
 Students entering university require remedial help. 
 Falling standards have resulted from lower level entry requirements. 
 When universities seek higher fees students are frustrated. 
4 
 There are too many graduates in areas which are not vital to national development. 
 Jobs formerly held by those without degrees are now claimed by the high numbers of graduates, 
thus causing employment and job dislocation. 
Section B: Understanding 
Questions 2 and 3 
The passages in this section followed the established pattern: one literary piece, one expository piece. 
Examiners were happy with the length and degree of complexity/simplicity in both passages. The first 
passage was an extract from God Bless the Child, published in Essence, September 2006. The issue dealt 
with homelessness and the impact on children. 
The examiners’ overall assessment was that most candidates attempted all questions, and interpreted them 
satisfactorily. The major problems came from questions that required skills of literary analysis. Such 
questions included: 
 Why does the writer use the expression…?
 List two ways in which the family was affected by the mother’s decision.
 What is the narrator’s attitude to the situation described in the passage? 
The expository passage was less well handled. Its subject was Yoga in the Caribbean. Though the 
language was well within their reach, it was observed that some candidates appeared to be unfamiliar with 
the term Yoga. Most of the candidates’ difficulties arose from inadequate vocabulary, and a weak 
response to the written expression, that is, weakness in analysing the written word. 
The questions offering most challenges were (b) and (c), which asked for recognition of contrast; (e), in 
which the word “complementary” appeared to be unfamiliar (it was frequently interpreted as meaning 
‘free’); and (f), which required an appreciation of connotation and denotation, indicating that there is still 
some inability to distinguish between literal and figurative language. 
Teachers and students are again referred to the Skills and Abilities to be Assessed section of the syllabus 
and encouraged to pay attention to Understanding (c) — grasp insights from reading literature. 
Other persistent problems are the failure to use quotation marks when asked to quote, and the use of full 
sentences when asked for phrases. This becomes a problem when the sentence used contains ideas that 
are opposed to the answer required. 
5 
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
For the January examination, candidates were given more details in the instruction to encourage them to 
be conscious of their task. This seems generally to have brought good results. Problems continue, 
however, in the ability to distinguish between narrative and description. 
Question 4 
It was noted that candidates were better able to respond to the picture stimulus. Though there were 
responses which were expository, these were fewer — an improvement over the past. 
Question 5 
For the most part, responses were satisfactory. Candidates in instances were able to use the stimulus to 
develop interesting story lines and characters. Stories were generally effectively organized. The areas of 
weakness were in most instances weak language structure and mechanics. 
Question 6 
This question continues to produce answers that make heavy use of narration rather than description, but 
there has been improvement in the number and quality of the descriptions. 
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
Question 7 
As with Section C, examiners felt that the expanded rubric worked to the candidates’ advantage. Several 
approaches to the dialogue seemed possible, but candidates successfully responded to a selection of 
aspects given in the stimulus. Valid points were made and correct arguments and strategies employed. 
Question 8 
This was the more popular choice of stimulus. Again, there was scope for several interpretations or 
reactions, as there was some scope for addressing some social issues. Responses suggested that 
candidates identified with the topic. 
Weaker scripts demonstrated: 
 Inability to develop points rationally 
 Poor organization 
 Limited vocabulary 
 Weak sentence structure 
 Misuse/overuse of the rhetorical question 
 Inadequate linking of points/paragraphs 
6 
Assistance with this part of the syllabus is found in the document, under the heading Expression. The 
section with suggested activities, in particular Expression (c) and (d) contains many suggestions. 
Recommendations 
 Planning: The rubrics which introduce each section of the examination paper invite candidates to 
plan their longer responses. This was often interpreted as ‘write the essay, then copy it’. This 
double-writing affects time negatively, and many answers showed the hurry to complete. Some 
candidates also failed to cross out the unwanted answer. The preparation for the examination 
should include the skill of outlining, so the candidate can make maximum use of the time.
 Language Use: The quality of language generally, but particularly in the questions which 
demand longer continuous answers (Questions 1, 4/5/6; 7/8) raises some concern: shifting tenses, 
lack of discrimination in past tenses, lack of subject and verb agreement, basic punctuation and 
spelling errors are all persistent problems. Very often, rereading reduces the number and type of 
errors, and students should be taught how, and encouraged to reread critically. 
 Examiners advise that much more effort should be put into helping candidates to improve their 
stock of adjectives and adverbs, and to providing opportunities for studying and emulating good 
descriptive pieces. 
 Most candidates are exposed to the visual through television. This can be used constructively to 
help develop the skill of descriptive writing. Candidates may be invited to role-play, to be the 
camera or camera person. They should become familiar with the concepts of foreground, middle 
distance and background; with the techniques of panning and focusing; and helped to distinguish 
between concrete and abstract words and phrases. 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have been prepared to write their argumentative 
essays along specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while 
some students do benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the 
risk that competent and even superior students will be forced into a mould which affects their 
expression and development negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and 
provide them with a variety of ways to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
 EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2014 
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
– 2 –
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance in English A remained moderate in the May/June 2014 examination sitting. Fifty-nine per cent 
of the candidates achieved Grades I to III, consistent with overall performance in May/June 2013 when 58 
per cent of the candidates achieved similar grades. There was a moderate improvement in performance on 
Paper 01, which assesses Profile 1, Understanding, and a small improvement on Paper 02 which also 
assesses Understanding but focuses primarily on Profile 2, Expression. 
However, performance on Paper 02 continues to be below the expected standard. The questions in the three 
sections on this paper generally elicited only moderate levels of performance. General weakness was 
observed in many candidates’ inability to organize ideas and to use grammatical English in expressing these 
ideas. 
The instructions to Sections A, B, and C have been expanded in order to help the candidates maximize 
responses and scoring opportunities. There is some evidence that the candidates’ attention has been drawn 
to this feature, but more encouragement is necessary to ensure greater compliance with these instructions. 
Too many candidates lapsed into the vernacular in answering Questions 2 and 3, and in responses to Section 
C.
Apart from the grammar, vocabulary and expression issues, poor handwriting and spelling stand in the way 
of obtaining the best marks. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple-Choice 
Generally performance on Paper 01 was good, with approximately 82 per cent of candidates achieving the 
three top grades. The areas of particularly weak performance on this paper were the questions set on the 
expository extract. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
Question 1 
Candidates were instructed to read an article about the moon and its perceived effects on various aspects of 
life and activity on Earth, and then write a summary not exceeding 120 words. While the article captured 
the attention through a popular connection between the moon and insanity, that was not its focus. The 
article established through examples, that some ideas about the moon’s influence leaned towards the 
scientific, others towards popular folk tales and beliefs, and that research and investigation continue. 
Candidates’ responses were generally in the moderate to lower levels of competence. While many were able 
to recognize and express the moon’s importance to life, its suspected link to insanity and other negative 
behaviours, many were deceived by their own knowledge of the myths, folklore and old wives’ tales which 
are associated with the moon and focused incorrectly on these areas. Answers strongly suggested weakness 
in understanding the passage, and an inability to analyse the ideas expressed in it. This meant that such 
candidates were, in turn, unable to express those ideas cogently and in their own words. Answers showed 
significant weakness in making appropriate links between ideas, resulting in inappropriate strategies, 
ranging from repetition and/or extensive ‘lifting’, to the extreme of simply copying the passage until the 
word limit had been reached. 
– 3 –
A major hindrance to successful summary is lack of vocabulary, and poor expression. The CXC English A 
syllabus strongly suggests and seeks to foster a working relationship between literature and language. This 
gives students the benefit of experiencing, first hand, language in effective use. Use of good literature does 
not seek to force students to study literature per se, but exposes them to the quality of vocabulary and syntax 
that create good expression. 
The following italicized section is taken from the scheme used for marking the summary in each English A 
examination, and should be kept in mind as part of the teaching: 
Content 
The answer will be judged for its adequacy with respect to the following criteria within the set word limit. 
 Selection and accuracy of details (and their original linkages) and their completeness. 
 Clarity and faithfulness in respect of purpose/intent, and appropriateness of message and tone. 
 Attention to perspective/point-of-view and consistency of focus. 
Organisation of Content 
 Arrangement presented through sequencing, selection of cohesive ties, achievement of economy. 
 Arrangement of information in a coherent structure and sense of audience. 
Points to be noted in the answer: 
The moon is believed to have a variety of effects on all forms of life, but the extent to what is fact and what 
is fiction is still unclear. People are still inclined to mix scientific thought with myth. The facts are: 
 The moon has a strong gravitational pull on large masses of water on earth. 
 The human body is 70 per cent water, but it is too small to be affected by the moon. 
 The moon’s phases affect the reproductive cycles of humans and marine life. 
The beliefs are: 
 Madness, arson and violent crimes increase with the full moon. 
 More babies are born with the full moon. 
There is a suggestion that human behaviours are affected by beliefs, and research shows some correlation 
between change of behaviour and the changes of the moon. 
Sample Summary: 
Sample 1 
Several aspects of our lives, and events on a planet, have long been associated with the moon and its phases. 
Some of these things are built on scientific fact, others on folk beliefs. Researchers have investigated some 
of the beliefs, but results are inconclusive. One accepted feature is that the moon affects reproduction 
among females and some sea creatures. There is the belief that our bodies which are 70% water, are 
affected by the moon, but since such effects are only shown on large bodies of water, the belief is 
questionable. The moon’s connection to madness is also questionable. One lecturer in psychology suggests 
that our beliefs shape our lives and that we change our behaviour according to the things we believe. (110 
words) 
– 4 –
Sample 2 
It has been long believed that the moon affect many forms of life in some way. Some effects have been 
accepted by scientists such as the moon’s influence on the movement of large bodies of water and the 
reproductive cycles of women and some types of shellfish. There is the belief that there is a correlation 
between the moon’s phases and negative changes in human brain activity and actions. Anecdotes 
suggesting a rise in the number of babies being born at a particular time of the month and an increase in 
violent crimes have been linked to the moon’s cycle. Although the results of research into these areas have 
been inconclusive, the moon continues to fascinate us. (119 words) 
Sample 3 
People have long been led by evidence or story, to believe that the moon influences our lives. For instance, 
scientists accept the moon’s influence on reproduction among marine life, and its effect on the human 
female’s menstrual cycle. It is also known that the moon’s gravity affects water on Earth, but that water 
must be in very large quantities, so effects on the human body are rejected. Some people link insanity, 
higher birth rate, and periodic peaks in violent crime with the full moon. Scientists are investigating 
because of the many stories of lunar effects, true or imagined generally there is some acceptance of a 
connection between the full moon and behaviour changes, but conclusions are still mixed. (118 words) 
Superior responses reproduced the critical elements of the original passage in the candidate’s own words, 
most often in flawless or near flawless language. In a few instances, responses indicated a superior 
understanding of content but some weakness in language. 
Responses assessed as suggesting or demonstrating incompetence included one or more of the following: 
 The introduction of extraneous material based on prior knowledge. 
 Misinformation prompted by inadequate understanding of details. 
 Incomplete ideas. 
 A listing of ideas with no recognition of the relationship between points. 
Recommendations for Teaching 
Comprehension skills (primarily) and summary writing skills need to be reinforced. Students should: 
 be exposed to a wide range of expository passages and be guided in analysing text structures and 
modes of development 
 receive more practice in expressing what they read in their own words 
 be given exercises using transitional words 
 be exposed to good summaries which they are encouraged to critically examine for content, 
technique and length 
 be encouraged to participate in oral exercises in recounting versus summarizing (using topical 
issues, events and popular shows) which will grasp their attention, stimulate understanding, and 
demonstrate the goals of summary 
 exposed to sessions of functional vocabulary 
As understanding and summary exercises done in the classroom demonstrate mastery, attention should then 
be given to completing tasks within a given time frame. Penalizing the use of the language of the passage 
will drive home the value of using one’s own words.
Teachers are also encouraged to make use of the Internet, and to encourage students themselves to explore 
this avenue. It will alert them to the value of the skill, and break the tedium of the classroom. What the 
students learn, they can themselves introduce or teach to their peers. Several URL’s will be evident through 
a Google search, many of them produced by teachers. 
– 5 –
Section B: Understanding 
Section B continues to offer the candidates two short pieces of writing for study and comprehension: one 
piece expository, the other literary. These questions assess candidates’ preparedness to interact with various 
kinds of writing in their adult life, including their ability to recognize fact and fiction, and to appreciate the 
wealth of meaning conveyed by good writing. It seems, however, that the students are not challenged during 
their preparation for the examination, to recognize the different kinds of writing; their purposes, audiences, 
and styles, and therefore to expect a difference in the kinds of questions attached to each type of writing. 
According to the syllabus, candidates are expected to consider and appreciate the various techniques used 
and their effects; to recognize and understand literal and figurative language; to be able to quote accurately; 
to know the differences between ‘phrase’, ‘sentence’, ‘word’ and ‘expression’; to find the direct statement 
and the inference. Unfortunately, the evidence is that most candidates are able only to respond adequately to 
the straightforward, information-gathering kind of question. 
Question 2 
This question consisted of an extract from Harvey River: Memoir of My Mother and Her Island. The term 
‘memoir’ should have alerted candidates that this is more artistic than factual. It makes use of figurative 
language from the first sentence, “Hard Life was an ill-mannered visitor …” and uses expressions like “oily￾mouthed feasts’, for instance. Individual sub-questions asked candidates to recognize the words and phrases 
which created particular meaning and many candidates did not demonstrate the ability to do so. Many also 
failed to respond well to questions which asked for purpose, effect, feeling, description of character, or 
recognition of irony. 
Question 3 
This question presented a discussion on the effects of fast food. The passage is written in a matter-of-fact 
style, provides definitions, offers evidence through statistics and cites authority and is more in keeping with 
the kind of passage that candidates seem to like. Candidates appeared to have understood the content, but 
had severe difficulty in expressing meaning. One of the problems noted was a carry-over from Section A: a 
question which enquires interpretation cannot be effectively answered by simply lifting a sentence and 
presenting it as the answer. Based on this particular passage, candidates were required to recognize attitude, 
explain phrases, identify intention, recognize implications and give reasons. All of these proved to be very 
challenging tasks. Very noticeable again was the problem caused by poor vocabulary and, it is strongly 
suspected, by lack of exposure to extended, high-quality writing on various topics. Challenging words in 
this extract included “epidemic” and “unnecessarily”.
Recommendations for Teaching 
 Make use of high-quality magazine articles which provide writing that is modern, and factual without 
being pedantic and ‘highbrow’.
 Teach students how to structure answers. For instance, when a question asks “What is the writer’s
purpose, the answer must include the infinitive: “To…” 
 Recognize that figurative language is not restricted to literary texts. 
 Use the CXC literature texts as part of the language instruction. 
 Find ways to introduce vocabulary exercises. For example, the Toastmasters Club has a practice of 
introducing, explaining, and encouraging correct use of a new word each meeting. This may be 
adopted as a daily classroom activity. 
– 6 –
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
Question 4 
Again in this examination sitting, the story based on the picture was the one which most candidates 
attempted. Unlike last year, this year’s stories were the best done of the choices. Generally candidates 
managed to successfully incorporate the stimulus into their responses. Answers ranged from simple stories 
of a haunted house to some attempts at metaphor and personification. 
Question 5 
This was the second choice of the narratives, and was more challenging. Though the idea of music and a 
party attracted candidates’ attention, their answers were less successful and less imaginative. Answers were 
less sure as some candidates could not determine whether to focus on the mistake, or the hesitation. Only a 
few combined the two successfully. Many spent the time describing a situation leading up to the decision or 
mistake, and were ineffective in structuring satisfactory endings, often petering out into simple, predictable 
and anti-climactic outcomes. 
Question 6 
The stimulus given in this year’s paper read: “When the fishermen finally reached the shore, what greeted 
them was nothing that they could have described.” The focus of this stimulus was the shore. There is room 
in this stimulus for the candidate to spend some time describing what was experienced before reaching the 
shore, in order to emphasize the unimaginable nature of the actual beach, which must also be described
(i.e.: visual detail given). In fact, the wording made the beach scene the area of greater importance, but 
candidates did not seem to recognize this. In addition, what was seen (described) on the beach could have 
been negative or positive, as the candidate chose. The problem is that the candidates need to be taught how 
to analyse, then encouraged to use the analytical skills to interpret what is said or not said, required or
not required, in a stimulus; and through the analysis to find the focus. Otherwise they could (and did) 
misapply their time and energy. 
Among the problems noted this year were: 
 Low level of ability to differentiate between a descriptive essay and a story. In fact, the number and 
quality of responses to this option indicated a regression from the standard achieved in the past two 
years. 
 Fewer candidates showed an understanding of the requirements of a descriptive essay. They failed to 
see the accumulation of details in order to give a picture, and settled, instead, for vague 
generalizations. 
 The organization was weak, so that many candidates were unable to master the spatial aspect: moving 
left to right, top to bottom, panning, etc.) 
 Rather than say what could be seen, and involve the audience in seeing the details so they might react 
on a personal level, candidates told the audience what to feel (e.g.: … it was warm and sunny … 
instead of … people were dressed in as little as was allowed, short shorts, sleeveless shirts, old ladies 
carried umbrellas…) 
 Candidates were trapped in the concept of time and event (in the narrative ‘… and then, and then …”)
– 7 –
Recommendations for Teaching 
 Our students, born and raised in a visual age, may have reached a point where they no longer see 
what is around them. In addition, they are blasted almost continually with loud and demanding 
sound. There are many practical reasons for learning to ‘see’ and describe.
 This suggestion invites the teacher to conduct brief but enjoyable training sessions:
 Provide students with only the sounds, then ask them to supply the visual, first orally, then 
in writing. Use a radio play, or a song, for instance.
 Have students, working in small groups, blindfold each other and then experience 
something.
 Present students with jumbled details, then have them arrange the material logically, and 
account for their choices.
 A writer may make use of multiple strategies to develop a piece of writing, and students need (i) to 
recognize these techniques and (ii) to understand how to identify the piece according to the 
predominant purpose and style. For example, an argumentative essay may use some definition or 
narrative to help in making a point clear. Narratives very often use description, in order to establish 
‘setting’ in time and place. Students must be encouraged to see the differences when a piece of 
writing is dedicated to story, OR to description.
 Teachers are encouraged to use literature (the texts set for English B, for instance) to help students 
to recognize and create different kinds of writing.
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
The questions were appropriate for the age level of the candidates, and examiners generally thought they 
were apt choices as they allowed candidates the opportunity to express their reasoned views and arguments 
on topical issues, bearing in mind that candidates range from those of middle to upper high school age to 
those who are at the age of adult maturity. 
Question 7 
Responses to Question 7 suggested that it offered candidates a manageable challenge in terms of ideas for or 
against (i) the claim that homeless people are a nuisance, and (ii) that the homeless should be forced into 
government-provided housing. Candidates had many ideas, but the challenge lay in their ability or inability 
to: 
 recognize the aspects of the discussion 
 organize their thoughts effectively to cover all aspects of the discussion 
 organize their ideas for the best strategic impact (move from stronger to weaker or from weaker to 
stronger points) 
 link their ideas and achieve cohesion 
 muster syntax and vocabulary well enough to express themselves clearly. 
Less able candidates understood the concept of ‘nuisance’, but then devoted the entire essay to establishing 
that nuisance element, abruptly attaching the ‘forced into …housing’ as a conclusion. In many instances 
candidates failed to support their claims, and relied instead on repetition of opinions. 
Question 8 
Question 8 required that candidates recognize the nature and purpose of rules generally, and of school rules 
in particular. It also required that they have some understanding of freedom generally, and a consciousness 
of how personal freedom fits into the broader issue. The problem of inadequate vocabulary negatively 
– 8 –
affected understanding and responses to the prompt. Particular areas included the meanings of ‘violate’ and 
‘personal freedom’. Violate was often interpreted as ‘annoy’. Many candidates took the statement 
personally or very narrowly, and related incidents of personal affront or negative reactions by schoolmates, 
rather than explore the concept of violate. Most often the focus was on specific rules in specific schools. 
Recommendations for Teaching 
 In responding to arguments, whether in real life or in examination essays, it is necessary to address all 
aspects of the argument that are put forward; not answering a specific aspect suggests that the candidate 
has a problem with that specific aspect. In any case, answers to arguments in examination essays have 
to be comprehensive since marks are assigned to the different parts of a question. In other words, if the 
candidate omits part of a question, he/she automatically loses the marks assigned to it. 
 While this section of the paper often gives topics which are of immediate interest to teenagers, 
candidates also need to keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interests. 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have prepared to write their argumentative essay along 
specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while some students do 
benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the risk that competent and 
even superior candidates will be forced into a mould which affects their expression and development 
negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and provide them with a variety of ways 
to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
 Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially in 
the proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, 
contrast and concession. Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by 
contrast’ and ‘accordingly’ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in 
fragments, as they often are. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2015
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2015 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance in English A in January 2015 was fair. This was reflected by an increase in the 
percentage of candidates achieving acceptable grades. Approximately 56 per cent of candidates 
achieved Grades I–III, an improvement on January 2014 when the percentage of candidates who 
achieved this level of performance was approximately 52 per cent. The percentage of candidates 
who achieved Grade I increased from approximately seven per cent in 2014 to eight per cent in 
2015. 
Improved performance was evidenced on Profile 2, Expression. While overall there was an 
improvement in the quality of responses on questions on Paper 02, candidates continue to 
experience difficulty on the Expression profile. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice
Performance on Paper 01 was very fair with a mean score of 57 per cent. Nineteen per cent of the 
candidates achieved Grade I on this paper while 80 per cent of candidates achieved acceptable 
grades, I–III. Candidates were generally able to recognize facts stated explicitly and to extract 
specific and implied information. Items based on word and sentence meaning were generally well 
done. Items requiring recognition of errors in usage, inappropriate grammar or vocabulary in 
sentences were also generally well done. In the comprehension items weakness was noted in some 
candidates’ ability to evaluate the effectiveness of language devices used and the appropriateness of 
different forms and structures used to achieve the author’s intention. This was especially evident in 
Items 21–30, which were based on a poem. Items 23–26 and 29 assessed candidates’ knowledge of 
metaphor, tone, mood and connotative meaning. Items 40–47 assessed candidates’ ability to obtain 
information accurately from informational text. Candidates were expected to understand the 
writer’s intention, make comparisons and sequence information.
Paper 02 – Free Response
Section A: Summary
Question 1
In Section A candidates are required to demonstrate the ability to understand the written text, 
organize information and express the ideas clearly. To reiterate the message of past reports, the 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific 
discussions, analyses) suitable to the secondary school age group. The skills of selection and 
concise expression are targeted and specific aims are detailed in the syllabus under Understanding 
(a) and (b) and Expression (a), (b), (c). Included in the syllabus is the following advice: Summaries 
require economy of language, the careful selection of the relevant main ideas, and the preservation 
of the intention of the original.
The passage selected for January 2015 instructed candidates to read an article entitled ‘Our History, 
Our Future’ and write a summary of it not exceeding 120 words. Candidates’ responses were 
generally below average. The mean on this question was 12 out of 30. Some candidates’ answers 
suggested that they understood that man’s past mistakes are being repeated and that these could be 
avoided but they copied the words/sentences which expressed such. The majority was unable to 
say how to avoid the mistakes without using the words from the passage. In fact, most candidates 
- 3 -
began and completed their summaries using the same vocabulary presented in the passage. Many 
candidates actually wrote ‘summaries’ with six paragraphs (the same number as the original). This 
method of summarizing (slavishly following the structure of the original) prevented them from 
making appropriate links between ideas and resulted in repetition/extensive ‘lifting’. Many 
candidates also rewrote the examples and the quotation with a few ending their summary with the 
latter. There were also instances where candidates simply copied the passage until the word limit 
had been reached.
Apart from the language weakness, candidates demonstrated weakness in selecting the crucial 
elements and were hampered by a lack of vocabulary. Other persistent problems come from the 
assumption that the first sentence in a paragraph must be the topic sentence.
The points which should have been included are:
 History is full of valuable information, not only about events and dates, but also about 
behaviours and the consequences of those behaviours.
 People usually learn about history but do not learn from it, so they make the same mistakes 
of earlier generations.
 In order to learn from history, the reader must go beyond superficial study, must analyse 
and so learn from the earlier mistakes and best practices.
 Good research skills applied to history can lead to the discovery of effective strategies to 
be used in business and social development.
 Since history records human and cultural attitudes and behaviours, individual and national 
expectations, societies’ strengths and weaknesses, a study of it shows how to avoid conflict 
in a variety of contexts.
Sample Summary 1
History provides considerable information about dates and events, but also stores knowledge and 
examples which we, as individuals and leaders, can use in our daily personal and business lives. 
To get the benefit from history, we need to approach it inquiringly and analytically. We are then 
able to recognize, understand and appreciate character, patterns of behaviour, cultural 
peculiarities, social conditions and needs and responses. We also have a chance to understand 
more of the interpersonal and intrapersonal factors relating to managing people, our businesses, 
and our lives. When we fail to study history appreciatively we miss the warnings, repeat the 
experiments and bad practices, and get the same disastrous results as our predecessors did.
114 words
Sample Summary 2
History books contain useful knowledge of events, situations and human interactions. If we really 
want to reap the benefits of this knowledge, we need to use an analytical approach to the study of 
history. We will find that it gives us blueprints and advice on how to alleviate a wide range of 
negative human activity. We can avoid global and personal conflicts while we improve our 
business practices and our social and cultural interaction, both locally and globally. In short, the 
application of history’s lessons can be of great benefit to man’s progress. Instead, we learn only the 
contents of history and continue to make the same mistakes our ancestors did, so that history 
repeats itself.
116 words
- 4 -
Sample Summary 3
History contains a wealth of information relating to dates and events. In addition, not only are 
examples of human behaviours and actions recorded, but also the results of such; yet man has the 
tendency to simply learn history without using the analytical approach to it that would enable him 
to learn from it. As a result, the patterns that history has created are often unnoticed. By failing to 
make use of the positive insights provided, the mistakes of previous generations are repeated. The 
application of the analytical approach produces guidance for human interaction. Through it we 
avoid cultural and social conflicts. The result should be an improvement in human relations in all 
spheres.
113 words
Recommendations
Comprehension skills need to be reinforced and students should
 be exposed to a wide range of expository passages and be guided in analysing text 
structures and modes of development
 receive more practice in expressing what they read in their own words
 be given exercises using transitional words
 be encouraged to complete classroom exercises within the specific timeframe and word 
limit. Students should also be penalized for ‘lifting’.
Notes and Suggested Activities (specifically pages 6 –12) of the syllabus, will help both teacher and 
student to identify and hone summary skills. Strong support is also given in the new Nelson 
Thorne’s CXC English A Study Guide.
Section B: Understanding
Questions 2 and 3
These questions are designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one 
expository. The skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) 
(pages 2–3). Each passage has a different focus: in the expository type of passage the objectives are 
outlined in (a) and (b); in the literary, the greater number of questions satisfy Understanding (c). 
The results for Question 2 strongly suggest that reading and analysing writing of a literary nature 
needs to be given more attention. Pages 12–14 of the syllabus should be invaluable. Where 
questions require information obvious in the text, candidates gain marks, but fail to read between 
the lines, understand inference, purpose, techniques, and connotative language. 
Question 2 
The performance of candidates on this comprehension question indicated a wide range of abilities 
in comprehension, with scores ranging from 1 to 15. The mean on the question was 7 out of 15. 
While many candidates were able to correctly quote the phrase required in Part (a) (ii), there was 
the tendency to quote the entire sentence given in line 5, clearly indicating that candidates have not 
mastered the skill of ‘quoting a phrase.’
The passage set was an extract from the (Caribbean) novel The Leopard by Victor Reid. It is a 
reflective piece in which, through the night, the protagonist experiences a rainstorm and compares 
its destructiveness with the behaviours of a woman. In contrast, as morning comes and the storm is 
ended, he uses the metaphor of a fun-filled golden ball rising and breaking over the land.
- 5 -
Many candidates were able to identify the impact of the storm on the environment as requested in 
Part (c) (i). They were also able to accurately identify the words or phrases which conveyed this 
idea.
From the response of candidates, the most challenging question was Part (d). For this question, 
candidates were required to identify the difference in mood between paragraphs 1 and 3. Many 
could not use the terminology expected: dreary/dull; bright/hopeful. In some cases, instead of 
identifying the mood of the paragraphs, candidates reverted to identifying the mood of the writer.
Part (e) required candidates to quote pieces of evidence that suggested different times of the day. 
Some candidates were able to accurately quote the evidence, but others experienced difficulty 
producing answers that focused on the same time of the day, for example, morning.
Another challenging question was Part (f) (ii) where candidates were asked to identify another 
phrase in the passage which conveyed the same idea as “beyond the limits of the land”. Many got 
this incorrect. In other cases the question was not even attempted, suggesting generally a 
discomfort with metaphorical language.
The performance of candidates on the question indicates the need for some level of integration: 
using literature in the language classroom. It is evident that when candidates are asked to identify 
terms that are all too familiar in literature classrooms, those without that experience perform 
poorly.
Question 3
This passage examined the advantages and disadvantages of the increasing use of information 
technology in industry and commerce. It also looked at the impact on social and community life. 
It argued that in spite of the benefits, people and communities are vital and efforts must be made to 
maintain the connections between people. While Parts (a) and (c) which assessed the ability to 
retrieve information explicitly stated were answered correctly by the majority of candidates, Parts
(b), (d) and (f) were not well done as many candidates did not seem to interpret these questions 
correctly. The term ‘remote access’ used in Part (b) did not seem to be understood by some 
candidates while the writer’s ‘attitude’ was also not deduced by many candidates in answering Part
(d). The ‘effect’ the writer wanted to achieve by using the word ‘yet’ in Part (e) was another 
question not well answered. Part (f) required an inference which was not made in many instances,
while Part (h) required candidates to draw a conclusion. The mean on this question was 8 out of 15.
Section C: Story Writing
Of the three questions in this section, most candidates attempted Question 5. Question 6 was the 
least popular. A few very good responses were generated from all topics, but most responses were 
quite mundane. The use of Standard English continues to be a challenge for too many candidates, 
with obvious interference from the dialects used in the region. Many stories were poor in using the 
elements of story writing. Candidates must be encouraged to take note of the rubric especially as it 
applies to the way the stimulus is to be used, and to the length of responses.
Question 4
This question used a picture of a clearly malnourished dog about to be captured by a group of ‘dog￾catchers’. The picture focused on the animal and the devices used to catch it. Only the legs and 
arms of the catchers were visible. The stimulus offered candidates an opportunity to fully display 
- 6 -
the elements of short story writing and many candidates did a fair job of developing a story line and 
some attempts at characterization were quite good. The stimulus was used to present stories from 
several perspectives, for example, the dog, the dog-catcher or an animal lover. In many instances 
the conflict situation was clearly developed and a resolution established. The language component, 
although quite good in instances, revealed many areas of concern. The mean on this question was 
12 out of 35.
Question 5
The stimulus for Question 5 introduced a male, sitting on a bus between two persons who said they 
were his parents, and feeling that ‘something just did not feel right’. The candidates could have 
chosen any age group for the protagonist. A story which included internal 
conflict/reflection/suspense, and even comedy, was possible. Responses ranged from demonstrating 
incompetence to suggesting superiority although there were very few at the upper level. Candidates 
used the stimulus to varying degrees of effectiveness with most responses falling in the ‘suggesting 
competence’ range. Some candidates seemed to have difficulty linking the second part of the 
stimulus ‘something just did not feel right’ with the first part ‘two persons who said they were his 
parents’. The mean on this question was 17 out of 35.
Question 6
Descriptive writing continues to be a challenge for a large number of candidates. Pieces which 
focus on narration with only incidental description still form a major part of the submissions.
Candidates should be encouraged to show the situation to the audience through the details they 
give. Much work needs to be done in helping students to use structure and sequence to produce a 
good description. Candidates may be further encouraged and motivated if they are helped to see 
that the ability to describe is a vital aspect of our lives, part of our mechanism for self-protection. 
Observation, attention to details, and logical movement are relevant skills to be developed. The 
mean on this question was 15 out of 35.
Section D: Argument
Candidates were comfortable with these topics, and some very good work emerged. Still too many 
responses lacked adequate and well-reasoned arguments/points and the requisite and appropriate 
argumentative devices to convince or persuade their audience. 
Question 7
This topic was within the range of candidates’ experience so they were able to generate clear points 
for their responses. They were able to elaborate on these points thus providing the needed support 
for the topic. In addition to presenting sound arguments, many candidates were able to 
acknowledge and refute the counterarguments in a logical and mature way. For example, 
candidates argued that some of the benefits of the school setting include developing conflict 
resolution skills and team building while at the same time enabling individuals to develop a sense 
of independence. These responses showed that there was some awareness of the genre of writing 
that they were asked to address.
Some candidates demonstrated the ability to organize an essay vis-à-vis introduction, body and 
conclusion. This was probably facilitated by the extra page provided in the candidate booklet. 
There was evidence of prewriting activity such as brainstorming, outlining and the use of cluster 
webs — approaches that facilitate essay writing.
- 7 -
Unfortunately, too many weak aspects of grammar and poor spelling were evident. Some 
weaknesses were subject and verb agreement, pronoun usage, past tenses and weak sentence 
structures. Strategies need to be developed to help students to value their dialects while 
appreciating the need to use the standard variety of English. The mean on this question was 16 out 
of 35.
Question 8 
This question required candidates to give their views on the statement “No matter how old you are, 
as long as you live with your parents or guardians, you should obey the rules they set in the home”.
The question required three areas to be addressed, age, living at home and rules. Many candidates 
failed to address all aspects of the topic and repeated the same points throughout. In instances, their 
writing lacked clarity. Weak responses ignored punctuation, lacked logical sequence and used 
transitional words and phrases inappropriately. The mean on this question was 15 out of 35.
Recommendations for Teachers
 The quality of answers in Argument suggests that time management is an issue for many 
students. Students would benefit from some coaching in how to manage their time. 
 Students need experience in (1) planning stories and (2) editing to get rid details which do 
not help the story. For example, students will give a long list of friends who attended a 
party when those friends have nothing to do with the outcome; or they will spend time 
describing a morning when they need to focus on the night the event took place. 
The points following have been made before, but bear repeating in this report since they persist. 
 It is clear that significant numbers of students have not mastered the use of Standard 
English. For students who almost abhor reading, some methods must be found to 
encourage correct use of the language. More frequent exercises in writing, including taking 
dictation (of short stories) will help provide greater comfort with standard English.  Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when 
summarizing and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their 
responses into a coherent whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to improve the 
active vocabulary of students. For the more competent students, practice in construction 
shifts and equivalent sentences would be useful. 
 The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning.
 Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and in attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words 
and sentences work in the language is important.
 Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through exposure — if 
necessary, in class — to the reading of good literature. This includes focusing their 
attention to paragraphing, grammar, spelling, diction and other conventions of writing.
 Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story
writing and descriptive writing. Television watching is still a favourite pastime and can be 
a teaching–learning tool.











 














  
 

    
 








 
 
 
 




 
          


  

















   
 

 


 


 

 

 

   
 


 




 























 

 


 

 

 


 






 


    




      

































 


 


 


 

 

 

 

 












 

 
 


 

 


 
 
 














 

 

 


 




 
 

 

 







 

 

 


 



 

 
 
 
 








 

 

 

 



 
 

 


 







 



  
 

 

 



 

  

 



 




 

 

 


 



 








01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
2
SECTION A
1. (a) The staffroom of a school / A school.
(1 mark)
 (b) Focus on the scene and end of the scene. 
(2 marks) 
2. One of:
 -- he is contemptuous (‘bloody clowns’, ‘semi-literate’, ‘tongue 
like a woman’)
 -- he is cynical (‘expect nothing, avoid disappointment’, ‘bound to 
go to heaven’)
 -- he is intolerant (says nothing good about anyone).
 (1 mark for identification of attitude)
 (2 marks for evidence)
(3 marks)
3. Chaplain’s character comes under suspicion OR the audience is 
alerted to pay attention to the character to assess whether Pat’s 
statements are true.
(2 marks)
4. Any two of:
 -- the stage directions ‘synchronise his smash with the first stroke 
of the cane offstage’
 -- Chaplain’s acknowledgement (‘Ah, the Head’)
 -- the sound of flogging
 -- the stage direction ‘as he goes over to the headmaster’s door’. 
(2 marks)
5. Dacres is determined to make a good impression on the students OR
he takes the Chaplain’s comment to heart OR he is a conscientious 
teacher. His smile at Mica could have been friendly or may have 
indicated a more intimate interest.
 (an answer that addresses both stage directions – 
‘collects his things’ and ‘smiles at Mica’) 
(4 marks)
6. The irony is that as Chaplain he should be an example of care and 
compassion, yet he gleefully displays his lack of care for and 
brutality towards the students, even using scriptural allusion to 
support his attitude.
(3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
3
SECTION A cont’d
7. (a) Frightening OR horrifying. 
(1 mark)
(b) The synchronizing of his utterances with each stroke of the 
headmaster’s cane (‘rules are to be obeyed/whack; ‘yes, 
whack’) indicates his pleasure. He enthusiastically 
supports physical punishment.
(2 marks)
Total 20 marks
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
SECTION B
1. He worked non stop, Sundays as well as weekdays.
(1 mark)
2. Images: ‘blueblack cold; cracked hands; that ached from labour in 
the weekday weather’
Comment: The images depict the extreme severity of the weather 
and its punishing effect on the old man. ‘Blue black cold’ 
paints a picture of a winter so cold it has turned the old man 
black and blue – almost as if he is already dead. ‘That ached 
from labour in the weekday weather’ suggests constant, 
unrelenting exposure to the weather; ‘cracked hands’ suggests 
physical pain. 
 (2 marks for 2 images)
 (2 marks for fully explained comments) 
(4 marks)
3. He is selfless OR caring OR loving
(2 marks)
4. The speaker feels great pain or remorse as he reflects on his 
almost callous treatment of his father, the ways he had taken him 
for granted. This pain or remorse is conveyed in the repetition 
‘what did I know’ which sounds almost like a wail. The speaker 
realizes that his father had loved him though they had not 
communicated.
(1 mark for identification of the feeling) 
(3 marks for full discussion of the devices used to bring it across)
(4 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
4
SECTION B cont’d
5. Examples of metaphor: ‘blueblack cold’; ‘the cold splintering, 
breaking’; ‘driven out the cold’. 
 
Examples of personification: ‘the chronic angers of that house’
Comment: 
 -- blueblack cold – see question 2 above. NB: If this image was 
chosen for question 2, it cannot be chosen for question 5.
 -- ‘the cold splintering, breaking’ – conveys several pictures. 
Sound image – was the old man chopping wood to keep the house 
warm? Was there winter ice that was cracking as the fire the old 
man lit spread its warmth? This suggests that there was a war 
between heat and cold and the cold was giving the heat a knockout 
punch OR metaphor for tensions in the house – the relationship 
between father and son so chilling it is like winter ice.
 -- ‘driven out the cold’ evokes a picture of the cold as a live 
intruder that the old man is attacking.
 -- ‘the chronic angers of that house’ conveys a double meaning: the 
house so cold it seems the cold is angry; and the hostility or 
tension between the people in the house is as severe and long￾lasting as the winter.
 (1 mark for identification)
 (3 marks for fully explained comment)
(3 marks)
6. Examples of contrast:
-- heat (‘banked fires blazed’; ‘when the rooms were warm’) and 
cold
-- the father’s actions of love and the son’s indifference
-- the young boy and the adult father
-- the speaker’s boyhood self and his adult self looking back and 
reflecting
 
The contrast helps to evoke sadness OR wistfulness OR pain OR a 
sense of conflict.
 (1 mark for identifying a contrast)
 (4 marks for well developed explanation)
(5 marks)
Total 20 marks
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
5
SECTION C
1. ‘Rounded and curved’
‘She was the most appealing’
‘Her ... carried her like a princess’
(2 marks)
2. The writer repeats phrases eg. ‘but Granny (threw him out / put 
him off) in a humorous way to show the extent of Granny’s 
determination-no one below backra status was good enough for Miss 
Dorcas. It amusingly shows Granny’s determination to interfere 
OR Granny’s domineering control OR Granny’s possessiveness.
(3 marks for a fully developed answer focusing on effect of 
repetition as a technique)
(3 marks)
3. Her awareness of the opportunity for social mobility and her 
alertness in learning what she had to do in an attempt to achieve 
it OR her determination to get what she wanted.
(2 marks)
4. He is calculating OR he is an opportunist. 
(2 marks)
5. The writer sets her up in the backra-house where she behaves like 
the mistress of the house – the pride that goes before a fall –
and then he announces Mr Bill’s intention to marry a real backra 
girl.
 
(4 marks)
6. In paragraph 1 Miss Dorcas is a polished princess, in paragraph 4 
she has changed to a wildcat OR in paragraph 1 Miss Dorcas is the 
most desireable woman, in paragraph 4 she is devastatingly 
rejected. 
 (3 marks for a fully explained answer)
(3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
6
SECTION C cont’d
7. Title should highlight ironies OR hazards of ONE of the 
following:
 -- conceit
 -- social climbing / snobbery
 -- the overriding powers of grandmothers / parental figures 
 -- ‘anancyism’
 -- any other reasonable theme
 (1 mark for appropriate title)
 (up to 3 marks for justification)
(4 marks)
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
2
Rubric for Language and Organization 
Level of Performance Criteria
Excellent to superior
8-10
 Demonstrates excellent organizing 
skills: essay format with coherent 
presentation of points, effective 
linkages, well executed 
introduction, paragraphs 
 Demonstrates excellent grammar, 
sentence and syntactical 
structures, fluent or elegant style
Good
6 - 7 
 Demonstrates good organizing 
skills: points clear; uses 
introduction and coherent 
paragraphs
 Demonstrates fluent use of English 
with minor errors
Acceptable
4 - 5 
 Essay not as cohesive, but 
paragraphing used
 Several errors in language 
Weak
3 
 Weak organizing skills: very flawed 
paragraphing, or sectionalizing of 
essay answers, or little 
understanding of paragraphing
 Many errors in language
Very Weak
2 
 Little demonstration of essay 
format, few or no organizing skills
 Many language errors which hinder
meaning
Extremely Weak
<2
 Many language errors or too little 
information presented to make an 
assessment
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
3
Rubric for Content 
Level of 
Performance Criteria
Excellent to 
superior
19-25 
 Demonstrates in-depth and thorough 
knowledge of texts 
 Demonstrates excellent understanding 
of questions; where appropriate, 
makes comparative statements about 
texts
 Demonstrates excellent synthesis & 
analysis 
 Demonstrates appropriate & effective 
use of illustration/examples
 Demonstrates awareness, application & 
evaluation of writer’s craft
 Demonstrates sensitivity, personal 
response, and an understanding of the 
text as an integrated whole
 Makes appropriate value judgements, 
recognizes issues and thematic 
significance 
Good
14-18
 Demonstrates good knowledge of texts
 Demonstrates good understanding of 
questions
 Demonstrates fair -- good synthesis & 
analysis 
 Illustration/examples reasonable, not 
as many or as fully developed 
Acceptable
9-13  Demonstrates knowledge of some texts, 
or knowledge of texts only adequate
 Demonstrates fair understanding of 
questions
 Illustration/examples not full but 
reference made
 Literal level of analysis, may engage 
in story telling
Weak
5-8  Limited knowledge of texts
 Little or no analysis
 Illustration/examples flawed or 
inadequate
Very Weak  Very little or questionable knowledge 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
4
Level of 
Performance Criteria
2-4 of text 
 Little attempt to meet the demands of 
the question 
 Little or no organization skills
Extremely Weak
<2  Effort not in essay format
 No understanding of texts. 
Demonstrate high levels of 
unpreparedness. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
5
Question 1
(a) Describe what happens in this scene up to the point where Theseus 
leaves the stage. 
[8 marks] 
Hermia’s father Egeus has brought his daughter and her lover 
Lysander before Theseus to ask for is intervention in the dispute 
among them. Hippolyta, Thesesus’ Amazon bride to be, is also 
present. Egeus asks Theseus to force Hermia to give up Lysander 
and marry Demetrius, whom he has picked out for her and who has 
accompanied them to court. If she refuses, he wants Theseus to 
give him permission to dispose of her in whatever way he sees 
fit. Theseus agrees with Egeus’ stance, in keeping with Athenian 
law, which dictates that a father has sole rights over his unwed 
daughter — she is his property. Hermia stands up for herself and 
challenges the duke and her father. She says she is in love with 
Lysander, and will marry only him. Even when Theseus threatens 
her with the law, which stipulates that must either marry the man 
her father has chosen or stay unmarried forever, Hermia says she 
would rather accept the punishment than marry a man she does not 
love. She tells Theseus her father can marry Demetrius if he is 
so in love with the young man. Lysander and Demetrius both also 
have their say. Demetrius tells Hermia and Demetrius to give in, 
since his ‘right’ to Hermia’s hand is indisputable. Lysander 
argues that Egeus has no good reason to refuse him Hermia’s hand, 
since not only are he and Hermia in love, but he is at least as 
rich as Demetrius. Furthermore, Demetrius has broken faith with 
another girl, Helena, who is still in love with him. Theseus 
admits that he has heard about Demetrius’ treatment of Helena but 
has had no time to think about it. He leaves the stage, inviting 
Demetrius and Egeus to come with him so he can give them some 
advice and ask them to do some work for his wedding. Hippolyta 
also leaves with Theseus. Lysander and Hermia are left alone on 
stage.
An answer that mentions the role of all the characters on stage 
and outlines the central conflict in sufficient detail
(6 - 8 marks)
An answer that outlines the central conflict but omits some of 
the characters 
(4 – 5 marks)
A 
knowledge of
sketchy answer or an answer that demonstrates insufficient 
text
(Up to 3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
6
Question 1 cont’d
(b) What do you learn about Hermia’s character from this scene, and 
how is this view of her character supported by subsequent events 
in the play? 
 She is respectful but fearless ‘I do entreat your grace to pardon 
me/I know not by what power I am made bold’). 
 She is very determined to have her way. 
 She believes in true love over male law or paternal dictates. 
 She is willing to fight for her beliefs. 
 She is not intimidated by men — she defends her case in a court 
in which she is the only woman except the subdued Amazon queen. 
 She is fierce and passionate about what she believes in OR she is 
driven by passion. 
 She is heroic — being willing to stay unmarried in a society that 
looks down on single women (there is even a suggestion that 
Theseus means to put her in a cloister/convent). 
TWO qualities well developed - 3 marks each (6 marks)
How this view of her character is supported by subsequent events: 
She runs away with Lysander, braving the unknown, unafraid of possible 
consequences of being an unmarried woman alone with a man. Up to the 
point where Oberon’s magic takes over, she controls Lysander’s actions 
in the woods (telling him to sleep at a distance from her). When 
Demetrius pursues her in the wood, she curses him vigorously, and she 
even takes on Helena, who is bigger than she is, in a cat fight when 
Oberon’s magic shifts Lysander’s attentions from her to Helena. What 
is amusing is that in the wood Hermia throws off all the decorum she 
had shown in front of Theseus. Helena tells us that in fact she had 
been ‘a vixen’ in school. It seems that once she in in a free space, 
Hermia’s strong personality blossoms even further. Significantly, 
Hermia, unlike the men, never comes under Oberon’s spell. 
(3 marks)
[9 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
7
Question 1 cont’d
(c) Discuss the ways in which Hermia’s character challenges the 
conventional role of women in society. 
Hermia represents a radical challenge to strictures about women’s 
place in male-dominated Athens and by extension Shakespeare’s 
society. The entire play shows that these strictures hold very 
strong. Even in fairyland where Oberon and Titania are supposedly 
equal rulers, Oberon wants to rule Titania. The rude 
mechanicals’ play is about lovers who die because of similar 
social strictures against women in Babylon. Hermia is quite 
heroic and her attitude must have had a major effect on members 
of Shakespeare’s audience, whether shock, consternation, support, 
or joy.
She goes against the following:
 The (male) Duke has sole authority over his subjects
 Daughters are their father’s property
 Marriage is a market/business transaction in which the 
woman is sold to the highest bidder even if he’s 
dishonorable (Demetrius, by Lysander’s report, has jilted 
Helena after ‘making love’ to her, and Egeus must have 
known this since obviously it is widely rumoured)
 A woman’s feelings are irrelevant in marriage
 Women are delicate
 Women are/should be timid
 A woman who runs away with a man is dishonorable
Any other reasonable answer
TWO well developed points - 4 marks each [8 marks] 
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
8
Question 2
(a) Identify TWO of these worlds and explain how they are different 
from each other.
The worlds: the world of the Amazons; the fairy world; the upper 
class world of the Athenian court; the working class world of the 
rude mechanicals
Identification of two worlds (2 marks)
Differences 
Amazon (shown in the play only through Hippolyta, their Queen. 
Theseus reports that he conquered her and has brought her to 
Athens to marry him). 
 -- ruled by women, men not welcome
 -- serious
Athenian Court and upper class
 -- ruled by men/ Theseus, male power and male law dominant
 -- parental dictates valued over personal choice
 -- marriage arranged, love takes second place 
 -- serious
Fairy world
 -- has both King and Queen, with equal powers
 -- love allowed to thrive, is even magically assisted - law of 
feelings dominant
 -- both serious and comical
World of ‘rude mechanicals’
 -- freedom dominant—the men decide for themselves that they 
want to put on a play for the Duke’s wedding
 -- no women
 -- ruled by theatre/carnival (rules of playwriting and acting, 
Bottom as comic leader)
 -- humorous/hilarious
Discussion of two differences, well developed with evidence – 2 x 3 
marks
(6 marks)
[8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
9
Question 2 cont’d
(b) Discuss how Shakespeare uses the plot to connect the worlds. [8 marks]
The Amazon and upper class Athenian worlds meet when Theseus 
conquers Hippolyta the queen of the Amazons in battle and takes 
her to Athens to wed. Hippolyta is further drawn into the 
Athenian world as she is present when Hermia is brought before 
Theseus for disobeying the male law. She is also drawn into the 
working class world when Bottom and his crew perform their play 
at her wedding. Though she does not know it, the fairy world also 
affects her because the fairies come to bless the house after the 
wedding.
The upper class and fairy worlds meet through the lovers. Hermia 
and Lysander take refuge in the fairy wood in the hope of being 
able to find happiness and to escape the tyranny of the Athenian 
court. Demetrius, in love with Hermia, pursues them there and 
Helena who is in love with him, pursues Demetrius in the hope of 
weaning him away from Hermia. Oberon the fairy king gets 
mistakenly involved in their affairs as he overhears them talking 
and decides to try and right the situation by secret magic, with 
hilarious and often suspenseful results. The complications 
eventually get sorted out by Oberon’s magic. Just as all this is 
resolved, the Duke turns up in the fairy wood, pardons Hermia and 
Lysander and takes the lovers back to court. 
Working class Athenian and fairy worlds meet through theatre: The 
rude mechanicals meet in the fairy wood to practise their play. 
Their self appointed leader, Bottom, gets caught in Oberon’s 
plots, is turned into a donkey and is then kidnapped by Oberon’s 
wife Titania, who falls in love with him in his donkey form. This 
is because she has been put under a spell by her husband, who is 
punishing her for refusing to give him an Indian boy she has in 
her possession. 
Working class Athenian, fairy, and upper class Athenian worlds 
meet through theatre: When Oberon finally relents and removes the 
spell, the rude mechanicals emerge from the fairy wood to perform 
their play before the Duke Queen Hippolyta and the other human 
characters. The play ends with the fairies blessing the Duke’s 
house as Bottom’s crew finishes their play.
A full discussion of all the events that link the two worlds; must 
mention setting (wood, court etc) since in this play the setting is an 
integral part of shifts in events 
(6 - 8 marks)
A discussion of the main events that link the two worlds 
(4 - 5 marks)
A sketchy discussion or discussion showing insufficient knowledge of 
plot (Up to 3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
10
Question 2 cont’d
(c) As these worlds interact, what similarities do you notice between 
them? 
Possible similarities include (candidates must discuss examples
from text for each)
 
 conflict
 gender wars/differences
 power struggles
 tyranny 
 complicated by love OR desire
 illusion as a powerful force
 any other reasonable answer
Any 2 similarities fully discussed 2 x 4 marks (8 marks)
Comment on Shakespeare’s purpose (1 mark)
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 3
(a) Briefly describe Pa Ben’s role in the opening scene.
Pa Ben’s role as narrator
Pa Ben announces his role as narrator by intoning ‘Old Story 
time, Old Story Time.’ After he sets the stage for the story, we 
see the young Len, his mother and later Pearl, his childhood 
friend. The audience sees first hand, the conflict between Len 
and his mother from way in the past. Issues of blackness, 
identity and advancement are brought across. 
Through flashbacks and Pa Ben’s narration, the audience sees time 
sequences: Pearl’s five pregnancies grow into eleven pregnancies; 
the young Len and the mature, accomplished Len, the Sly George as 
a boy and as an adult, are seen.
Pa Ben controls the action and directs the audience to crucial 
themes such as race and class issues. 
Pa Ben’s role as social commentator
Pa Ben introduces the audience to issues of history and culture. 
Audience is made aware of how things were in the past – limited 
advancement/social mobility for blacks. Living conditions were 
equally bad – bad roads, no water, no electricity. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
11
Question 3 cont’d
Pa Ben’s role as character
Pa Ben’s centrality as a major character is highlighted. He is 
neighbour to Miss Aggy and therefore close to the action. He 
interfaces with all the major characters and is Len’s confidante. 
Through Pa Ben, all the important themes are brought across. 
Pa Ben’s role as director
Pa Ben’s action in changing scenes as in his initiation of the 
song, “Change the house round” to convert Miss Aggy’s house to 
the bank scene with Lois and George. 
Pa Ben’s re-setting of the stage in putting the chairs back in 
place as he and Miss Aggy prepare to go to Pa Zaccy‘s nine night.
Pa Ben’s input in the action as he bridges gaps in the story as 
it unfolds (e.g. informing us about George’s marriage and 
commenting on it, describing his visits to Len’s school on 
occasions when he accompanied Miss Aggy. 
Any 2 points, 4 marks each [8 marks]
(b) How does Pa Ben introduce the concept of “old story time” in this 
scene? 
The concept of “old story time” is brought across through:
 His own narrative of the past – his father’s penchant for 
storytelling and the rituals involved (drinking rum, singing)
 Pa Ben’s repetition of “Old Story time, Ole Story time” to begin 
his storytelling event (a kind of call to arms/a summoning of the 
village)
 The events, places, people – all in the past, although he was a 
key participant and observer to the story he is going to tell
 Naming (his own name and reference to Pa Zaccy) 
 Common courtesies, for example “All well,” and reminding George 
that “thanks” is part of rural value system. 
Any 2 points, 4 marks each [8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
12
Question 3 cont’d
(c) How does Pa Ben’s role in the Act foreshadow his role in the rest 
of the play?
 Pivotal to the action – present or within earshot of most of the 
action
 Keeper of secrets (and Pa Ben being the balance between Len, Lois 
and Miss Aggy)
 Adds to tension 
 Adds to suspense 
 He continues to speak to the audience, bridging gaps in the 
narrative
Any 3 points, 3 marks each [9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 4
“Most elements of the play Old Story Time contribute to the theme of 
class and colour prejudice.” To what extent is this true of TWO of the 
following?
Characters 
 The black, brown/near white characters are presented to reflect 
the ethos of the period. The colonial society is reflected in the 
socio-economic and socio-political realities of the blacks being 
at the bottom and the near whites at the top and the typical 
demarcation of the underprivileged and privileged. However, as 
time passes, we see that in the later years (1970s) things have 
begun to change somewhat.
 Miss Aggy is filled with self-hate (“anything black no good’) and 
drums this into her son to aspire to Miss Margaret, the pastor’s 
daughter, with long hair down her back. 
 Using characters to bring across contrasts – the black Pearl 
(perpetually pregnant, who might have been different had she had 
the home support) and Lois, who was the first black woman to work 
in the bank.
 Exploring stereotypes and the irony involved – the white George 
(mongoose) is a schemer and quite dishonest (an ironic response 
to Miss Aggy’s belief that blackness is “no good.”)
 Len and Lois represent black people who are breaking the glass 
ceiling. Rhone presents them as very mindful of their roots as 
poor working class. They never come across as people who will 
show off on less fortunate black people. They will not adopt the 
colonial ways.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
13
Question 4 cont’d
 Pa Ben as wise, experienced commentator discusses the theme of 
class-colour prejudice in different ways. He criticizes Miss 
Aggie’s self-hate and George’s marriage.
Setting 
The technical aspects of the stage/staging and the physical 
locations/scenes contribute to the theme of class and colour 
prejudice:
 Miss Aggie’s house in the rural village, with chamber pot and 
outside toilet contrasted with the bank where upper class/near 
white George reigns supreme; contrasted also with Munro College 
where Len who is black and poor is abused by white upper and 
middle class boys. This setting is introduced by the sound of 
horse - drawn buggies depicting the domain of the rich. All of 
these together show how much the lighter skinned people were in 
control in the past
 The house in town where Len and Lois live. The fact that this is 
a well–appointed house and that they live on the same street as 
George shows that in the 1970s things are beginning to change —
black people are breaking the glass ceilings through education, 
ambition and intelligence.
 The fact that the same set is changed around to become all these 
various locations (for example, the song ‘Change the house 
around’ is sung while this happens) becomes symbolic that the 
class-colour divides of the past are not fixed in stone — change 
is coming.
Costuming 
The divisions among people based on class and colour are identified 
and portrayed: 
 Peasantry costume
 Miss Aggy’s market clothes, Pearl’s tattered attire, Pa Ben’s 
clothing
 George’s suits
 switching or donning pieces of clothing (hats for example) to 
indicate change in status (for example, Lois changing into bank 
teller’s clothes, Len in the present in suit showing he has 
breached the class-colour divide).
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
14
Question 4 cont’d
Flashbacks
Flashbacks contribute to colour and class prejudice: 
 The first flashback introduces the audience to the main themes in 
the play – blackness, identity, advancement, class restrictions. 
Miss Aggy beats Len because he associates with Pearl, the 
“frowsy-tail, jiggerfoot…board head gal”. She insists instead 
that he cultivate the friendship of Margaret, the “nice brown 
girl with tall hair down to her back.” 
 The time shifts allow the audience to make comparisons of events, 
behaviours and people: Len’s treatment at school by George, 
Margaret and the well to do; George’s blackmailing of Lois; Miss 
Aggie and George
 Flashbacks allow the audience deeper understanding of events and 
consequences, for example, Lois’ stealing to help Len and the 
subsequent blackmail; George’s threat of making an example of her 
race by exposing her.
Any 2 elements with any 3 points fully developed, using examples from 
the text, 4 marks each 2 x 3 x 4 (24 marks)
Showing that the two elements inter-relate (1 mark)
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 5
(a) Briefly outline the experience of the persona in EACH poem. 
The experience of the persona in each poem:
“Dulce”
A soldier vividly describes the horrors of war as he helplessly 
watches one of his comrades being “gassed.” Returning from the 
battle scene, “bent double,” coughing and limping with blood-shod 
feet, they had not heard the gas-filled shells being dropped. 
Most managed to escape, but this one comrade did not. The 
experience is traumatic for the soldier who recounts this 
experience of his unfortunate comrade and lashes out at all who 
buy into or are brainwashed into thinking that it is a good thing
to die for one’s country.
 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
15
Question 5 cont’d
“Dark Time”
The speaker describes his country at war and being taken over by 
foreign forces. The landscape is changed. All are sad, anxious 
and afraid. Gunshots ring out daily and even nature seems to take
part in this national mourning. 
4 marks each [8 marks]
(b) Discuss the ways in which EACH poet conveys the horror of the 
experience.
Ways in which EACH poet conveys the horror of the experience: 
The following devices/strategies should be connected to the 
horror of the experience of war. Mention must be made of how they 
enhance/heighten the feeling of repulsion/revulsion and general 
distaste of war. Sound and sight imagery must be linked to 
emotions evoked and mental pictures created in the mind of the 
reader. Figurative devices should suggest how the experience is 
horrible for the speaker and by extension, the reader. 
“Dulce’
Any two devices: 
 Vivid diction: graphic words/ideas – blood-shod feet; white eyes 
writhing; froth-corrupted lungs; blood gargling
 Imagery, especially relating to sight and sound: “thick green 
light,” “white eyes writhing;” “blood/come gargling”; (these are 
also metaphors)
 Simile: “like old beggars under sacks; ” “as under a green sea;” 
“like a devil’s sick of sin;” “obscene as cancer;” “bitter as 
cud”
 Metaphor: “an ecstasy of fumbling”
 Repetition: “all” in stanza one; “gas” in stanza 2; the many 
words ending with “-ing” and the choking/stifling feeling 
generated e.g. fumbling, stumbling, flound’ring, guttering, 
choking, drowning, smothering, 
 Irony: the title as against the poem itself (way in which the 
poem exposes this “lie”)
“Dark time”
 
Any two devices: 
 Repetition: “dark”/”dark time;” repetition in questioning (last 
stanza)
 Imagery: sight and sound, especially: use of colours (red flowers 
[blood?], brown beetles, dark time, strained and anxious faces; 
gunshots
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
16
Question 5 cont’d
 Oxymoron: “festival of guns”; “carnival of misery”
 Personification: “Red flowers bend their heads in awful sorrow”
 Metaphor: “brown beetles” could allude to army invasion
 Contrast: boot of steel versus the slender grass, showing the 
vulnerability of the people versus the brutality of the invaders
Any 2 devices well explained for each poem, 2 marks each [8 marks]
(c) What comment does each poem make on the subject of war? 
“Dulce”
Any two of: 
 Being on the battlefield is a horrifying experience. It 
dehumanizes people. Many are scarred for life. The feeling of 
helplessness and hopelessness is horrifying.
 Dying in the above - mentioned scenario is not noble. 
 The stereotypical assumptions about war and fighting for country 
are lies. Children (or the young and those anxious for glory) 
should not buy into this belief.
 The “old lie” is exposed and explored though what might be seen 
as an eye-witness account.
 When we have an intimate knowledge or experience (as in the dying 
soldier’s reaching for the speaker to help him) we are able to 
see what is taken for granted with fresh eyes.
“Dark Time”
Any two of: 
 War affects all. 
 War is so dehumanizing that even nature makes a statement (as in 
pathetic fallacy).
 There is a kind of helplessness that comes with war.
 War imposes itself on a nation’s culture (festival, carnival)
 War robs a nation of its independence and its dreams (“aiming at 
your dream”)
Any 2 comments made for each poem, 2 marks each (8 marks)
Any attempt at comparison/synthesis (1 mark)
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
17
Question 6
(a) For EACH poem, discuss the prejudice, showing how it affects the 
actions of individuals. 
A model answer will identify the type of prejudice, outline the 
context in which the prejudice is being demonstrated or 
contemplated, and discuss how and why it manifests in the actions 
of the character/s who practise it or are victimized by it. For 
example, a discussion of ‘Dreaming Black Boy’ in answer to this 
question should include this information: the picture is 
presented of a little black boy in Jim Crow America thinking 
about the ways in which racial prejudice as practiced by whites 
has surrounded his life and attacked his dreams. His teacher 
ignores him in class, he is given sub-standard education so that 
he will have to ‘lick boots for a living’, he cannot travel the 
globe freely because hotel owners might bar him from entering 
their premises. We get the sense that the boy is sitting by 
himself musing sadly.
[8 marks]
(b) Demonstrate how the poet’s use of any one device heightens the 
presentation of this effect in EACH poem. 
The model answer will also identify a device and discuss examples
of HOW the device works to sharpen the reader’s awareness of the 
effects of the prejudice. ‘How’ means that it is not enough to 
name the device and its effect, but to demonstrate exactly how it 
manages to achieve this effect. Here is a good example: ‘In 
“Dreaming Black Boy” the poet’s use of the repetition “I wish…” 
throughout the poem achieves several effects. For example, 
because it begins every stanza, we get a sense that the boy is 
constantly repeating to himself the ways in which he longs for a 
world without racial prejudice. This conveys a sense that the 
prejudice surrounds his entire life, and that he is in constant 
pain because of it.’ A less effective answer might identify the 
device, give an example and state the effect without showing how
we got there. For example ‘The speaker’s repetition of ‘I wish’ 
tells you that racial prejudice hurts him.’ The least effective 
type of answer will sketchily mention the device and the effect 
‘The poet uses repetition to show how the racial prejudice hurts 
the boy.’ The element of personal response—how the poet’s use of 
the device affects your own thoughts or emotions will enhance the 
quality of this model essay. 
[8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
18
Question 6 cont’d
(c) What issues does EACH poet raise by his or her exploration of the 
theme of prejudice? 
The model answer will identify important general principles or 
ideas (the poet’s messages) that emerge from the poet’s treatment 
of prejudice. 
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 7
(a) Describe what we learn from the narrator about the life and 
personality of Mister Papacita. 
 He brought joy to the children with his songs as he engaged them 
with the call and response communal activity
 Through the ribaldry of some of his songs he also introduced 
adult themes to the children and helped to bond the adult 
community through entertainment.
 He made work blessed as he blended his garden work with songs
 He beat drums and chanted at wakes and funerals and weddings
 He became a different person at weddings/community gatherings of 
mourning or celebration—physically he was transformed and he 
transformed others as they heard his songs and hymns.
 He was the perfect husband and friend to Miss Aita, except that
he refused to go to church with her. 
 A turning point came in his life when Miss Aita died. His life￾giving spirit left him, and he turned to drink.
 He became unruly and unmanageable, destroying the furniture in 
his house and leaving a trail of grief in the community.
 In his drunken state, he would call on all to serve God, as if 
Miss Aita’s churchgoing had somehow had a deep unconscious effect 
on him, or as if he felt unaccountably guilty about her death.
 After his hospital visits for detoxification he returned as a 
spiritless, tired old man, and rejected attempts by the villagers 
to lure him to church. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
19
Question 7 cont’d
 Then another turning point came—the climax of the narrative. 
Unexpectedly, mysteriously, he joined the staid Weslyan church. 
At his baptism his early spirit of music returned and caused 
several conversions, most of which did not last. He, however, 
remained faithful to his church. 
 The reader, like the narrator, is left with more questions than 
answers (silence) about the real reason for Mister Papacita’s 
conversion. 
A well expressed answer that covers Mister Papacita’s 
relationship with the children, the adults, the community as a 
whole, and Miss Aita; the significance of these relationships; 
and 
the issue of silence
the turning points in Mister Papacita’s life that introduce 
. [9 marks]
(b) By what strategies does the narrator reveal her attitude to 
Mister Papacita?
 The narrator maintains a child’s perspective on Mister Papacita, 
so her naïve puzzlement about the reasons for his change is 
convincing
 At first, like the other children, she is excited by and welcomes 
Mister Papacita’s singing, games, jokes etc. This is shown in the 
descriptions she uses (diction, images etc)
 The narrator expresses perplexity about the changes in Mr 
Papacita’s character through her constant use of questions
 She is confused by the change in Mister Papacita after Miss 
Aita’s death, and she uses the strategy of the community’s gossip 
to explore the possible reasons
 She intuitively compares the reasons put forward for the changes 
and shows her bias in the process—she reveals her preference for 
the colourful Mister Papacita, indicating that to her, he is ‘the 
real Mr Papacita.’
Any 2 strategies fully developed, 4 marks each [8 marks]
(c) How does the story of Mister Papacita’s life contribute to ONE 
theme in the text as a whole? 
 The theme of experience — how adults and children’s perspectives 
differ. (sometimes the narrator is young and naïve; at other 
times she is a reflecting adult seeking to make sense of life and 
events) 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
20
Question 7 cont’d
 The role of the church and its meaning and relevance to the 
community as a whole
 The nature and meaning of silence, the part that music and 
harmony, and chaos and noise play in expanding our understanding 
of silence
 The nature and meaning of silence — what for example is the 
connection between visible action and hidden mutation?
 Relationships — how opposites can attract. 
Any 1 theme fully discussed [8 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 8
Use the character Nathan to discuss the ways in which Forbes presents 
the theme of silence.
The chapters of Songs of Silence hold together as a chorus of songs 
from one community, but shaped by the recollections of a narrator 
whose perspective ranges from the innocence of childhood to the 
maturity of a young adult who emerges unbroken from a failed 
relationship. In the chapter ‘Nathan’, the narrator is the reflective 
adult with a sophisticated notion of the wide range of meanings 
‘silence’ holds. Through the character of Nathan she is able to 
present some aspects of this theme, which runs throughout the text in 
many different ways. 
 Nathan acts strategically without words, but with potent meaning —
revenge (poking Tony’s eye). 
 Silence is a characteristic feature of Nathan’s personality, which 
is deep and profound even though he uses few words. The absence of 
words can mask/hide a great deal.
 Nathan’s deep and profound silence was evident even from his birth 
and the close connection he had with his sister, the narrator –
‘…soulmates, welded together by our common need for silence.’ They 
both started speaking late. However, her silence was different from 
his — ‘he was a man of dark blue silences,’ hers ‘was a silence of 
moons.’ Here the narrator suggests that contrary to the saying 
‘silence means consent’, silence dies not always mean one thing nor 
are all silent people to be treated the same. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
21
Question 8 cont’d 
 The ‘manna manna manna mahkita’ game establishes the communication 
between the narrator and Nathan. It has unspoken personal meaning 
for them and suggests that its ritual is imbued with almost 
religious or spiritual significance. It shows that codes of 
communication that may seem meaningless to others looking on, may be 
a way of expressing connections that [known] words cannot express.
 The different silences of the siblings allow them to explore, define 
and find their own authentic selves in their own ways. (Narrator and 
ants, Nathan and tightfistedness with money). Silence, like 
language, can express identity.
 Forbes presents the narrator speculating on the genesis of Nathan’s 
tightfistedness — was it a reaction to their parents’ wastefulness 
or their loud quarreling? Silence generates questions that try to 
fill up the space of what we don’t know/what silence withholds from 
us. This idea is one of the most pervasive throughout the entire 
book.
 Silence emerges as fate — instrumental even in their adult years, in 
ironic ways, as illustrated by the fact that the narrator ‘entered a 
profession that fractured [her] silence’ and Nathan married a 
‘noisy’ woman. Silence is insufficient just as speech is 
insufficient—both Nathan and his sister look for their opposites in 
order to complete their personalities, just as Miss Effie went 
silent after speech betrayed her.
 Colours are a major element in defining the nature of silence, just 
as colours differentiated the nature of Mister Papacita’s music. 
 Water-river or sea — is also used to define/differentiate the nature 
of silences (as in ‘Morris Hole’). This is similar to the ‘snail’s 
shell upon my back’ in ‘The Woman with No Name.’
 Through these symbols and images Forbes helps us to understand 
intuitively the narrator’s conflict with her brothers, and Nathan 
particularly, as she gains greater awareness of her femaleness in 
response to their overwhelming maleness. Are women’s silences 
different from men’s, and men’s words different from women’s? (‘mine 
was a silence of moons’). These are some of the questions we ask.
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
22
Question 9
‘Bolo is a heroic figure whose heroism was not always understood by 
those around him.’ Discuss the character of Bolo in light of this 
statement.
Candidates do not need to agree with the statement. ‘Discuss’ 
indicates that a candidate may agree fully or partially or not at all. 
This question requires the candidate to indicate the definition of 
heroism that will guide the essay. As with other essays, scripts that 
make some reference to the author’s techniques indicate superiority. 
Candidates should include examples to prove their points.
Possible definitions of heroism: 
 defying great odds or dangers in order to fight for what one 
believes in
 sacrificing (for example, one’s life) for others
 sacrificing for others (for example, one’s life) even when they 
don’t understand us or our sacrifice
 having a vision of the greater good and being willing to take the 
lead in bringing it to fruition
 standing up for one’s beliefs in the face of great hardship, even 
putting oneself at risk
 standing up for others in the face of great hardship, even putting 
oneself at risk
 being willing to lead others in dangerous situations, in pursuit of 
high ideals
Instances of Bolo’s heroism: 
 At the end of the first chapter Bolo is introduced as ‘the warrior 
still’ who is shocked and heartbroken by the church’s self 
rejection. Warrior’ introduces the idea that he will be a fighter, 
his heartbreak introduces the idea of what he will fight for—ideals. 
Bolo’s idealistic insight is contrasted with the church’s pragmatic 
acceptance of defeat. Bolo represents an ideal and a promise. ‘
 Bolo fearlessly questions the dominant views of the group about Ivan 
Morton. He does not believe, as they do, that Morton is a man of the 
people or that talking to him will lead to their advancement or 
freedom from persecution. 
 Bolo is not afraid to defy the authorities. He recognizes that the 
colonial police are the enemies of the people and he feels ‘We have 
to kill Prince.’ He understands this at a literal and symbolic 
level. This contrasts with Bee and Eva, who as representatives of 
the church and the people, even accept their son’s application to 
the constabulary. Bee and Eva are heroic enough to break the law by 
worshipping in their own way, but they lack the radical daring of 
Bolo.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
23
Question 9 cont’d
 When he fights against Prince and the other policemen for arresting 
his mother among the worshippers, Bolo’s heroism is realized through 
his blood relations 
Possible points of view in response to the statement:
(i) Bolo is a heroic figure who was not given a chance to display his 
full heroism as the people he defended were too afraid to work 
with him against the colonial authorities. They did understand 
him but were afraid.
(ii) Bolo has potentially great qualities but he becomes mean-spirited 
and judgemental when his people do not agree with his approach to 
fighting the colonial authorities. A true hero is able to 
understand the people he wants to help, and does not humiliate or 
hurt them.
(iii) Bolo is a warrior hero but his people no longer want [or needs] 
warrior heroes; they want educated leaders who can use the system 
to beat the system.
(iv) Bolo is an anti-hero — one of those characters in books who rebel 
against everything an unjust and hypocritical society views as 
heroic. Through such characters, authors send a message to 
society, which often does not understand the anti-hero, and may 
even despise him.
Some points to support (i):
 Bolo is a stickfighter in the carnival tradition. So he is 
associated with the warrior hero. He is strong and bold and loves 
his people, does not think only of himself but of them. At the end 
of the first chapter he is introduced as the ‘warrior still’, who is 
shocked and heartbroken at the Spiritual Baptist church’s acceptance 
of the unjust law. He also tells them that they are wrong about 
Ivan Morton. He does not believe, as they do, that Morton is a man 
of the people or that talking to him will lead to their advancement 
or freedom from persecution. Bolo’s idealistic insight contrasts 
with the church’s pragmatic acceptance of defeat. His willingness to 
tell them the truth shows that he cares for them and that he is 
offering himself as their leader.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
24
Question 9 cont’d
 It is clear his people do love and admire Bolo, even though they are 
not able to rise to his level of heroism. Eva, the narrator, 
presents him in a sympathetic manner, and tries to understand him 
even though much of what she learns about his behaviour is reported 
to her third hand. As a member of the community that deserts him, 
Eva accepts blame for Bolo’s tragic demise and describes him as a 
crucified Christ. After his death she says he is not dead and hopes 
he never dies. By this she means that his memory, the memory of the 
things he tried to teach them but which they were too afraid to 
learn, and the memory of their shame and how they failed him, will 
live on.
 Bolo recognizes that the colonial police are the people’s natural 
enemies. The brutal officer Prince represents the worst excesses of 
the Police force, and it is clear from Eva’s narration that he is 
despised and feared. But while Bolo argues that ‘We have to kill 
Prince’, Bee and Eva, who can be seen as representing the church’s 
and the village’s attitudes, fail to send the right message to 
their son Winston and so Winston joins the police force. Bee is 
enraged and ashamed at this betrayal of ideals on Winston’s part. 
But unlike what Bolo would have done, he still tells Winston to go 
ahead. When Bolo says ‘we have to kill Prince,’ he means this at 
both a symbolic and literal level. Bee and Eva’s heroism goes only 
so far as to declare ‘we have to break the law’, meaning that they 
will worship in their own way in spite of the law against it. They 
are too afraid to accept Bolo’s radical solution. They are afraid 
for their children; also they feel defying the law by violence will 
only bring more violence down on them. Yet they love and admire Bolo 
and feel he is destined for great things (Eva’s descriptions). 
 Bolo matches heroic actions to words: he fights physically against 
Prince for arresting his mother; and fights Innocent for taking 
advantage of 17 year-old Lester, both in support of Lester and to 
show the community that they had turned against themselves in the 
most unjust way.
 When Bolo turns ‘badjohn’ it is still in an effort to make his 
people learn self-defence and courageous action. His rogue-like 
behaviour has a kind of logic in it – to show that he detested what 
the community had become. The trend of the community turning against 
itself was most represented by Mitchell’s exploitative and corrupt 
business practices, and Bolo uses ‘badjohnism’ to protest against 
this. He takes the two sisters as a challenge to his people; he is 
most offended by the introduction of the police in what he believed 
was the community’s business. Eva’s narration tells us that he 
looked heartbroken when this happened, almost as if he were pleading 
with them to have the courage to face him instead. (The one person 
who ever stood up to him was Charleau, and as a result, they became 
friends).
 Bolo’s tragic death can indeed be blamed on the community. It is as 
though he sacrificed his innocence and good reputation, even his 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
25
self - on their behalf, to no avail. Fear of the colonial powers 
made them impotent. Bolo is a tragic hero.
Any other reasonable point
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
26
Question 9 cont’d 
Some points to support (ii): 
Bolo’s great qualities include: champion stickfighter in the great 
warrior tradition of Africa and the carnival; community consciousness, 
idealism, and love for the people (‘...he don’t just fight to win 
battles for himself…and he do it with love and respect, more as if he
was making a gift of himself, offering himself…as if what he really 
want is for the people to see in him a beauty that wasn’t his alone, 
was theirs, ours…’).
 However, he fails to understand the real dilemmas the people face. 
Their fear for their children if they use violence is legitimate. 
Also, it is not easy for them to commit murder (‘kill Prince’), and 
they also want to promote civil society in which law works for them, 
not against them. They are trying to give Ivan Morton a chance to 
help them by legal means. They need to hope that one of their own 
has not really betrayed them. Bolo is right—they are shortsighted in 
not eventually getting up and fighting, whether physically or 
otherwise when it becomes clear Ivan is a traitor, but their point 
of view is understandable. Bolo isn’t able to see inside their minds 
but Eva as narrator is, and she gives a sympathetic portrayal of Bee 
and the others even though she too does not agree with them. 
 When Bolo kidnaps the two sisters and abuses Mitchell we lose 
sympathy for him no matter what Eva says. His treatment of them is 
inhumane and extreme. It seems he hopes that this will hold up to 
them a mirror of what they have become in their self-rejection, or a 
mirror of what the colonial establishment is doing to them. But how 
can people follow a leader who leads by fear or by terrorizing their 
children? How can love show itself in actions of hate? The tragedy 
of Bolo is that both he and the community became confused, one by 
disappointment, one by fear. Bolo’s confusion led to his loss of 
self and loss of heroism.
 Any other reasonable point
Some points to support (iii):
 The Caribbean has a long tradition of warrior heroes (for example,
Maroons, Three Finger Jack). The people usually love and admire 
them, but often they lead lonely lives as most people are afraid to 
adopt their radical means of resistance. Eva tells us several times 
that Bolo is ‘alone.’ Eva gives many descriptions showing the 
people’s admiration for Bolo’s physical beauty and strength, his 
stickfighting reputation and the fact that he is a ‘warrior still.’ 
But she also tells us several times that he is ‘alone.’ 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
27
Question 9 cont’d
 The people see Bolo more as a symbol than the leader they want. They 
do not believe in the kind of leadership he offers. They don’t want 
to meet violence with violence and kill Prince. This may be because 
of their cowardice or it could be because the society has changed. 
Eva says what the people need now to help them is the educated man 
who can take on the white man on his own terms. Eulalee’s rejection 
of Bolo for Ivan Morton is symbolic, as is Morton’s betrayal of her. 
 They pin all their hopes on Ivan Morton and even after he fails them 
they are afraid to adopt other means, and soon after, Bolo turns 
badjohn and they reject him even further, since now they are afraid 
of him.
 Going to prison may have brutalized Bolo and made him use violence 
against his people. But what it certainly does is show how alone he 
was — he is the only villager who went to jail because he is the 
only one who fought the police who arrested the church people 
unjustly (to defend his mother). It is most painful that no member 
of the group was sufficiently moved to join him. Bolo is a hero 
deserted by the people he fought for.
Any other reasonable point
Some points to support (iv): 
Anti-heroes are characters who do not have the traditional qualities 
of heroes, and often have opposite qualities to those of the 
traditional hero. They stand alone against society and are often 
disliked.
 Bolo starts off as a warrior hero admired by his people (see 
discussions at I, II and III). However, when he turns badjohn after 
the people desert him or fail to stand with him when he fights for 
his mother’s release, he begins to look more like an anti-hero. 
 Bolo becomes an anti-hero through his people’s fault (see 
discussions at I, II and III).
Any other reasonable point
3 marks for definition of heroism that candidate will use to guide the 
discussion.
Up to 8 marks for identification and description of Bolo’s heroic 
qualities and acts OR lack of such qualities and actions
Up to 7 marks for the interpretations of Bolo’s acts by those around 
him
4 marks each for 3 fully developed points about Bolo: 4x3=12
5 marks each for 2 fully developed points about those around him: 
5x2=10
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
28
Question 10
‘The Wine of Astonishment explores the ways in which power can be 
creative or destructive’. Dicuss with reference to one character in 
The Wine of Astonishment. 
Characters:
Bolo
Bolo’s power is both creative and destructive.
Creative: Bolo’s admirable qualities of power: Bolo is a champion 
carnival stickfighter who is looked up to and admired by the people of 
his community. Everyone admires him for this warrior prowess, and 
expects great things of him. The women admire him for his strength and 
physical grace as well as his sense of humour and community spirit. He 
is able to charm even the very old women. Bolo knows who he is and as 
a result is not afraid to speak out against the injustice meted out to 
his people or fight physically to free his mother when she is arrested 
unjustly. He is willing to take on the colonial establishment and 
‘kill Prince’, both literally and figuratively. Bolo’s power is 
multiple: the power of the warrior, the power of the charmer, the 
power of the revolutionary, the power that comes with self￾recognition. However, his potential to use his power lead the 
community and the church against the colonial establishment is lost as 
the people are too afraid to adopt his approach of direct, physical 
and radical resistance. They allow the power of the colonizer to win. 
This is the great tragedy of the novel.
Destructive yet ironically creative aspects of Bolo’s power: When 
Bolo’s power is not given its proper outlet he becomes a badjohn and 
terrorizes his people until they bring the police against him and he 
is killed. Bolo’s death however is not the end of his power. Eva the 
narrator says he is not dead, and she hopes he never dies. This 
suggests that Bolo still has power over the people’s memory. He has 
impressed them with his beauty and his strength. He has taught them 
shame, he has taught them how to be a man and not give in. 
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery — description of Bolo’s appearance etc
 Symbolism - Bolo as stickfighter symbolic of his moral warriorhood
 Contrast — with Morton,Prince, Bee etc
 Irony — Bolo/Christ rejected for Morton/Barabas
 Symbolism — Christ analogy
 Any other appropriate technique
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
29
Question 10 cont’d
Ivan Morton
Ivan Morton’s power is totally destructive
Morton is an agent of colonial power that oppresses the people. He is 
mentally enslaved. Worshipping the white man’s power, he turns against 
his own people and in a sense, himself. 
 colonial education empowers Morton to rise above the circumstances 
that oppress other poor blacks
 ironically, his parents’ sacrifice helped to give him this power 
through which he betrays everything they stood for (abandoning his 
father’s unfinished house is symbolic) 
 he has power over the people as they believe in him and think he 
shares their dreams and aspirations
 Morton trades on his people’s belief in the power of education; he 
uses education to trick his people into believing he will help them
 their votes put him in power, whereupon he promptly betrays them by 
feathering his own nest (new cars etc)
 he shows his allegiance to white power and contempt of his people by 
moving out of the village and into the white backra’s house, 
dressing always in suit and tie, deserting Eulalie and marrying a 
light skinned wife who approximates the criteria for white beauty 
and femininity, etc
 although Morton is in power, he does nothing to repeal the law 
against free worship, and in fact the persecution increases
 he keeps the people bamboozled by giving a few handouts and doing a 
few useless favours, for example, writing recommendations for jobs 
they can’t get
 in the end Morton is able to succeed because the people refuse to 
act on their knowledge of his betrayal, refuse to follow Bolo, and 
give up Bolo for Morton. This leads to Bolo’s turning against his 
people and finally his tragic death
 through this character Lovelace shows the evils of colonialism, 
fear, etc
Any other reasonable answer
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
30
Question 10 cont’d 
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery - (descriptions of Morton’ clothes, his nose that is always 
in the air as if sniffing something better)
 Symbolism - his always standing sideways, using two victory signs 
instead of one, the Richardson house that he moves into — described 
as a tomb
 Contrast — between Morton and the other villagers, between Morton 
and Bolo
 Parallels (with Prince, Mitchell, the Catholic church)
 Irony
 Any other appropriate technique
Prince
Like Ivan Morton, Prince is an agent of colonial power that oppresses 
the people. He is mentally enslaved, worshipping the white man’s 
power, he turns against his own people and in a sense, himself. His 
power is destructive.
 However, Prince’s weapon is not colonial education but colonial 
brutality.
 Prince is a member of the constabulary and he uses his position 
to brutalize the people. While other policemen will warn the 
church when a raid is being planned or will turn a blind eye to 
their mode of worship so long as they don’t flaunt it too 
blatantly, Prince pursues them relentlessly as if it is a 
personal vendetta
 Prince seems to be a sycophant who wants to show his superiors 
that he is not like these ‘backward people’
 he doesn’t care about his people, only about promotion
 Prince seems to enjoy brutality for its own sake, as if he has 
some secret insecurity that is satisfied by this power over 
others
 He seems to think his position gives him absolute power, so he 
doesn’t even feel he should answer legitimate questions such as 
‘why are you arresting these people?’
 Bolo challenges him by trying to incite the people to kill him, 
and then by physically attacking him when he arrests his mother 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
31
and the other church members. Bolo shows that colonial power is 
not absolute
 The showdown between them shows that Prince by himself is not 
really strong; it is only when a lot of other policemen come and 
beat him up that Bolo is subdued. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
32
Question 10 cont’d
 The lack of human care by those in power is shown when the police 
throw Bolo in the jeep without caring if his head is damaged.
 Tragically, no one except Bolo dares to fight Prince—they are 
afraid of the power behind him. Their failure to fight leads to 
Bolo’s going to prison and later to Bolo’s downfall.
Any other reasonable point
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery – description of prince’s brutal physique
 Symbolism — description of prince’s brutal physique
 Contrast - with Bolo
 Parallels - (with Morton, Mitchell, the Catholic church)
 Any other appropriate technique
Irony — Prince turns against the people, mirrors the people turning 
against themselves
Irony — people turn to police against Bolo and destroy Bolo in the 
process
Irony — Bee’s son becomes a policeman because of their failure to 
‘kill Prince.’
Irony — police/the law acts illegally to make people unsafe yet their 
role should be to protect
Irony — Prince’s brutality shows not his strength but his weakness—
bully
Any other appropriate technique
Mitchell
Like Morton and Prince, Mitchell is an agent of colonial power that 
oppresses the people. He is mentally enslaved. Worshipping the white 
man’s power, he turns against his own people and in a sense, himself. 
His power is destructive
 Mitchell’s weapon of oppression is money. 
 Achieving business success by craft and corruption (examples)
 Like Prince’s, the contemptible nature of his power is exposed by 
Bolo, who terrorizes him, destroys his shop etc. 
 Bolo stands alone as the rest of the village while aware of 
Mitchell’s wickedness, do nothing about it
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
33
Question 10 cont’d 
 Bolo tries to fight against Mitchell’s corrupt power by showing 
the people how Mitchell is oppressing them. His badjohn behaviour 
smashing up Mitchell’s shop is meant to show them in a mirror how 
Mitchell is a badjohn oppressing them yet they do not recognize 
this lesson 
 Although Bolo is destroyed in the end, he succeeds in erasing 
Mitchell’s illegitimate gains. The end of the book also 
vindicates him as Eva acknowledges that he had been right about 
fighting against men like Mitchell.
 Through this character Lovelace shows the all - pervasive evil of 
colonialism, fear, etc
 Rather than through his allegiance to the church. 
 Any other reasonable answer
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery
 Irony
 Symbolism
 Contrast
 Parallels
 Any other appropriate technique
Any 4 points fully developed for the ONE character’s qualities 
and behaviour related to power, 4 marks each (16 marks)
Any 2 points fully developed for the author’s techniques in 
showing the character’s relation to power, 4 marks each (8 marks)
Reference to other themes OR for demonstrating knowledge that the 
character discussed is similar to other characters in the book
(1 mark)
 
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
34
Question 11
(a) Describe the central unfortunate situation in each story 
‘The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream’
Benjy’s unfortunate situation is the combination of his family’s 
poverty and his father’s attitude, and how these threaten his 
dream. Benjy has never seen or tasted ice-cream but his sister 
Elsa has described it to him in such magical terms that his 
life’s dream is to taste the ice cream sold by Mr Doran at the 
Harvest Festival Sale. This dream provides an important source of 
hope for Benjy, who is not particularly happy at home, mainly 
because his father does not always treat him well. This is 
because his father secretly thinks that his wife cheated on him 
and Benjy is not his. At last Benjy’s chance comes when the 
family attends the Harvest Sale. Benjy is full of excitement and 
terror, as he is not sure his father will be in a good enough 
mood to buy the ice cream Elsa has promised he will finally get 
to eat. And in fact for a while it seems that Benjy will get no 
ice cream, as his father is busy watching his mother to see which 
man she is talking to. Benjy is so distressed that he starts to 
cry, much to the disgust of his mother and sister whose 
impatience only makes him cry harder. At last his father, 
reassured that his wife isn’t clandestinely meeting any man after 
all, purchases ice cream for himself and the children. But there 
is a dreadful final twist. Just at the moment when Benjy, seized 
by fearful anticipation, tremblingly hesitates to taste his since 
cream, his father sees his mother talking to a well dressed town 
man, and in rage grabs Benjy and rushes towards his mother. 
Benjy’s ice cream falls to the ground, never to be retrieved. 
‘Mom Luby’
The I-narrator Elijah (along with his sister Puddin’) has lived 
with his grandmother Mom Luby for three years, since his mother 
died. His unfortunate situation is that he is at the mercy of 
his aunt’s questionably morals and engagement in illegal 
activities. He is subject to the wills and scheming of Mom Luby 
who seeks to milk the welfare system, bribe the police to protect 
her illegal dealings and expose the children to illegal and 
perhaps immoral influences in the process. Elijah is obviously 
very happy living with Mom Luby, but but after a while their 
financial situation gets so difficult that Mom Luby decides she 
has no choice but to seek State assistance. She takes the 
children to the State Aid office to put in her request, and 
shortly after, a social worker from the office arrives to assess 
whether Mom Luby is deserving of this aid. The supercilious, 
insensitive social worker is appalled by the family’s cultural 
habits and way of life (for example she scorns their food). 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
35
Question 11 cont’d
Mom Luby sharply and humorously responds to every rude criticism 
made by the social worker, who is increasingly discomfited. The
last straw is when she finds out that Mom Luby, the community’s 
‘matriarch’, who is not educated as she is, is ‘practising law, 
medicine, and the ministry without a licence.’ She decides to get 
her own back at Mom Lube by refusing to approve her for State
Aid. As a result, the reader is made aware, Elijah (and his 
sister) remain subject to the colourful but illicit activities of 
Mom Luby. 
4 marks each [8 marks]
b) Compare the writers’ strategies showing how each creates 
different reader response.
Possible points of comparison: 
 Senior’s narrative technique is heart-wrenching, Hunter’s 
hilarious. As a result we feel Benjy’s situation as a tragedy, 
and Elijah’s as a comedy — Elijah will survive; we are not sure 
about Benjy.
 Senior makes Benjy’s hunger for ice cream and the fact that his 
father may be a stumbling block to his getting this ice cream, 
central from the beginning, whereas Hunter makes Mom Luby’s 
feisty, hilarious personality central, so that we feel from the 
beginning that whatever the outcome, Elijah will be all right.
 Senior uses a carefully graduated series of images and events to 
build up the reader’s agony on Benjy’s behalf (for example, his 
terror is vividly described at every stage; and at several stages 
she outlines a possible threat to Benjy’s dream of ice cream) 
while Hunter has the reader laughing throughout as Mom Luby takes 
control of the situation (for example, at the very beginning she 
tells the children to shut their mouths — ‘don’t mess up my lie’
— when she tells the Welfare people she is their mother. At first 
we are worried that she might be a shady character, and she is. 
She is a street-wise character who attempts to exploit the 
weakness in the social system and we even applaud her for that, 
but Hunter also reveals Mom Luby’s consistent trait of resistance 
to the legal mores and requirements of the society.
 Benjy’s story is told from the point of view of a sympathetic 
third person narrator who feels his suffering and relays it to 
the reader as if from inside Benjy’s head. Elijah is his own I￾narrator who tells the story as an observer of Mom Luby’s 
indomitable self-possession and feisty strategies of survival. He 
never expresses any feelings of fear, so we know he is not 
concerned about whether he has shoes or carfare for school — the 
great Mom Luby will take care of it all. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
36
Question 11 cont’d
 Benjy’s story ends with a stream of consciousness (all his 
thoughts running together without full stops or other 
punctuation) to show his distress, whereas Elijah’s ends with Mom 
Luby gambling/playing a card game and laughing (showing her 
contempt for the social worker’s view that she is bringing up the 
children in an unhealthy atmosphere
 Any other reasonable point of comparison. Answer MUST show the 
contrast between the tragic vision in Senior’s story and the 
comic vision in Hunter’s story. 
2 comparisons fully developed, 2 marks each
Explicit comparison
(8 marks)
(1 mark)
[9 marks]
(c) Which ending do you prefer and why? 
To gain full marks, the answer must focus on the endings. It must 
state the candidate’s preference, which can either be one ending 
over the other, or equal satisfaction/dissatisfaction with both 
endings. The candidate must give clear reasons for this response, 
based on comments about either the writer’s technique; or the 
‘vision’/perspective (on life, on the child’s situation etc) that 
the ending encourages. 
[8 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 12
Choose two short stories you have studied and discuss how the MAIN 
character in each deals with a challenging situation. 
The essay encourages candidates to cover the following:
 Select two appropriate stories, correctly identifying the main 
characters.
 Provide a description of the challenging situation.
 Show how the character deals with the situation, and what this tell 
us about him or her
 Discuss the strategies/techniques used by the writers to bring 
across the challenges
 Suggest some theme that the writer invites us to think about.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
37
Question 12 cont’d
Identifying and Describing the Challenging Situation 
Some stories present challenging situations on a personal level, as in 
“The Man of the House” where the young boy has to take care of his 
sick mother. 
Sometimes the personal may cover challenges such as confronting our 
own inner fears, problems, and prejudices as in “Blackout.” Here a 
white woman is approached by a black man as she waits in the dark at a 
bus stop. 
What might appear to be challenges to child might not be the case with 
an adult. In “The Day the World almost came to an End,” the child’s 
fertile imagination conjures images of the end of the world. Her 
hysterical reaction to an airplane flying overhead is humorous in its 
presentation. 
Often challenging situations exist in everyday life and play out in 
the larger political arena. “Berry” explores the sinister issue of 
racism, exploitation and prejudices. 
Other Points to consider
 Who is facing this challenging situation (is it a child, an adult, a 
male, female) and where this is occurring.
 What caused the challenging situation (is this of the character’s 
doing, some outside force)?
 How is the problem resolved?
How the Writer Brings Across the Challenging Situation
This kind of essay requires the identification and use of techniques 
used by the writers to get the message across. The challenging 
situations therefore, can be portrayed through the narrative 
perspective, symbols, figurative language, suspense, setting, 
flashback etc.
Story, 12 marks each (24 marks)
Comparison, 1 mark (1 mark)
TOTAL 25 marks
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2004, the second year of a new cycle (2003 - 2005), the overall examination performance was quite
consistent with that of 2003. Mark allocations were again indicated for the various parts of each question.
This helped candidates to manage their time more efficiently.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with texts and understanding of them, and
displayed a satisfactory grasp of the mechanics of writing. Still, avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and
punctuation are far too common across the board. Teachers and candidates need to be reminded that
there is no such word as “alot” in standard English; and that “all right” is the standard form of the phrase;
and that "its" is the possessive form of the pronoun (Every dog must have its day); and that “it's” is an
abbreviated form of “it is.”
Some candidates demonstrated a commendable ability to organize ideas into logical, well-argued paragraphs;
to frame their essays effectively with an introduction and conclusion; and to effect a smooth transition
from quotation to discussion. Too many, however, made little effort to structure their responses. It must
be emphasized that while the candidate is not penalized for sectionalizing responses, more marks are
given for a well-developed essay.
While most candidates performed very well in segments of questions requiring recall, most were not as
competent in analysing texts. Questions that asked for a discussion of the dramatic significance, or for
comments on poetic devices, for instance, tended to be poorly done.
Candidates need to be taught how to read examination questions carefully, and to respond fully or briefly,
as instructed, to all parts. Their attention should be drawn to the meaning of instructional words used in
the examination such as “Comment on,” “Describe,” “Identify,” “Compare,” and “Discuss.” These all require
different responses, and “briefly” means just what it says. They should know, too, that proper names
should ideally be correctly spelt, and the titles of works underlined.
Far too many candidates still disregard the caution that the same text is not to be used to respond to more
than one question, and many continue to use texts that are not on the syllabus. Candidates should be
reminded that they will be penalized for not observing these instructions.
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 8 of the syllabus:
1. Knowledge and Insight (Profile 1)
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of illustration
(c) Quality/Clarity of argument
2. Organizing of Response (Profile 2)
(a) Organizing (Structure and development of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs)
(b) Grammar and mechanics of writing (Sentence structure, punctuation, spelling, diction, etc.)
- 3 -
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
Section A tests
(a) description, analysis (that is, the ability to break down and select relevant data), and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form, information drawn from various sections of the
text), for the purpose of answering a particular question.
(b) the ability to support an argument based on reference to the text, a response to or opinion about a
play, novel, short story.
(c) an elementary awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, of the writer as a person who employs various
techniques in the shaping of the language and the presentation of human character and behaviour).
(d) an ability to recognize and distinguish between qualities of feeling as presented in a particular test.
(e) a grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
Section B tests
(a) the same skills as indicated for Section A. However, because of its focus on themes and the comparison
of texts, Section B requires an equal measure of analysis but a greater effort at synthesis to answer
questions adequately.
(b) an appreciation of the social content and context of literature.
Skills and Aptitude Tested in Paper 02
This paper tests
(a) comprehension.
(b) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet/dramatist achieves his
effect).
These skills require
(a) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function
in the passage.
(b) attention to dramatic devices, for example, stage direction and “props”.
(c) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
(d) awareness of the interaction among characters.
- 4 -
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01
Section A – Set Texts – Questions 1 - 14
ROMEO AND JULIET
Question 1
This question required an understanding of a crucial moment in the dramatic action – the Capulet feast.
Candidates needed to know the facts surrounding Romeo’s presence at the feast of his father’s sworn
enemy, what transpires at the feast, and the dramatic significance of the scene.
This was the most popular question of the entire examination attracting responses from 55 per cent of
candidates. Many candidates answered (a) and (b) satisfactorily – although far too many confused Mercutio
with Benvolio – but lost marks in (c), which required them to say why this scene was dramatically significant.
Teachers and candidates are reminded that questions on Drama will, in one way or the another, test
knowledge of dramatic significance.
Question 2
This question required an understanding of what is arguably the most memorable scene in the play.
Surprisingly only 8.2 per cent responded. Many candidates responded well to (a) and (b); but lost marks
in (c), which tested their knowledge of dramatic significance.
Romeo and Juliet proved a popular choice (the second most popular text) and, hence, an appropriate text.
However, there was quite a bit of film interference. Teachers and candidates are reminded that neither
video nor film ought to replace the text, on which questions are set.
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ knowledge of the final scene of the play in which the three most
important couples are present. It involved identification, description of the test that Petruchio suggests,
and the importance of Katherina’s closing speech.
Nine per cent of the candidates answered this question and many gained full marks in (a) and (b), but lost
marks in (c), which asked them to place Katherina’s speech within the context of the entire comedy. There
was, however, one perfect score on this question.
Question 4
As in the previous question, this one required candidates to know and understand a particular scene – the
wedding day (Act 3, Scene 2). Candidates were asked to respond to Katherina’s humiliation and anxiety
at Petruchio’s deliberate late arrival, to describe the choreographed appearance of a fantastically dressed
Petruchio, riding the most lamentable nag/jade, and to comment on the hero’s outrageous behaviour.
Only three per cent of the candidates attempted this question and there was no perfect score.
The Taming of the Shrew was not a popular text with candidates and teachers. This is not surprising,
since it hardly works as text in 2004. Only the most skilful actors can pull it off on stage.
- 5 -
SAINT JOAN
Question 5
This question required candidates to respond to Dunois’s initial appearance on stage. It expresses Dunois’s
love of art/poetry and his relationship with the heroine.
Only 2 per cent of the candidates chose this question and there was no perfect score. Most candidates did
not respond well to part (c).
Question 6
This question tested candidates’ understanding of events associated with the introduction of the Inquisition.
As was the case in 2003, Question 6 was again the least popular question of the examination. A mere 1.5
per cent of candidates chose it, and no candidate was able to score full marks.
Saint Joan was the least popular set book.
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
Question 7
Thirty-seven per cent of the candidates chose this question, which centered on the relationship between
the children and Boo Radley, and the majority of scores were between 16 and 21. Candidates generally
responded well to (a) and (b), but lost marks in (c). A number of candidates earned full marks in this
question.
Question 8
This straightforward question, which focused on Atticus’ character and the repercussions of his defence of
Tom Robinson, elicited the best overall performance from candidates. Twenty-seven responses earned a
perfect score, and the majority of scores were between 16 and 24.
To Kill a Mockingbird proved in the second year of this cycle to be the most popular set text. Its simple,
straightforward, linear narrative proved irresistible to 73 per cent of the candidates.
WIDE SARGASSO SEA
Question 9
This question on how Antoinette and her husband respond to Dominica elicited responses from eight per
cent of the candidates and there were many excellent responses, several of which earned perfect scores.
Candidates performed well in part (a) and (b) but experienced difficulty in explaining what the reaction of
Antoinette and her husband to Dominica tells the reader about the couple’s relationship.
Question 10
This question was more popular than its counterpart, and attracted responses from almost 13 per cent of
the candidates. Sections (a) and (b) were well handled, but (c) posed problems, no doubt because it required
a synthesis of knowledge and interpretation.
With 20 per cent of the candidates choosing Wide Sargasso Sea, it became the third least popular set text.
It is not an easy text at this level.
- 6 -
A WORLD OF PROSE
Questions 11 and 12
Question 11 was a popular question based on “The Two Grandmothers” and it was attempted by 33 per
cent of the candidates. There were many excellent answers and a number of candidates earned perfect
scores.
Question 12 on “Down Our Way” was much less popular than its counterpart. Both Questions 11 and 12
required a knowledge of only one short story, and this no doubt contributed to the quality of responses, as
candidates were able to cope well with the requirements.
Questions 11 and 12 elicited responses from 42 per cent of the candidates, and A World of Prose continues
to be an attractive option in Section A.
A WORLD OF POETRY
Questions 13 and 14
In Question 13, most candidates responded well to parts (a) and (b) but had difficulty responding to part
(c), the significance of the persona/speaker. In Question 14, (a) and (c) posed problems for many candidates.
There was only one perfect score among the responses to these questions.
Approximately 20 per cent of the candidates chose to answer Questions 13 and 14, 11 per cent less than in
2003. Happily, A World of Poetry continues to hold its own among set texts.
Section B – Themes – Questions 15 - 21
Question 15 – Love and Family Relationships
About 29 per cent of the candidates answered Question 15, and there were a fair number of very good
responses. Candidates handled (a) more comfortably than (b). Surprisingly there was only one perfect
score among the 5 243 responses. Choice of texts either positively or adversely affected performance.
Repetition of texts was the downfall of many candidates.
Question 16 – Freedom
Out of the 4 020 candidates who chose to respond to Question 16, approximately 25 per cent scored more
than 18 marks. While part (a) posed no real problems, part (b) proved a stiff challenge to candidates who
were less comfortable with comparison than with description, as required in part (a). There were two
perfect scores.
Question 17 – Heroism
Heroism perennially has been the most popular theme question. This year it proved to be the second most
popular question of the entire examination, attracting responses from 39 per cent of the candidates.
Candidates generally responded intelligently, but many had difficulty with (b), which demanded an
illustration of the effect of heroism on a major character. Scores of 18 marks and over were gained by 22
per cent of the candidates. There were four perfect scores among 6 938 responses.
Question 18 – Power and Authority
This question elicited responses from 22 per cent of the candidates, only one of whom provided a perfect
answer. Only 9.2 per cent of the candidates scored 18 or more.
- 7 -
Question 19 – Dreams and Aspirations
This question fell in popularity from 2003; only 28 per cent of candidates attempted it in 2004 compared
with 40 per cent in the previous year. It, however, was well handled, and recorded the highest percentage
of scores above 18 among the theme questions.
Question 20 – Women in Society
This question fell dramatically in popularity in 2004, in comparison to 2003. This is surprising in this age
of feminism, liberation and the fact that the question encouraged candidates to demonstrate their
understanding of how and why a female character triumphs in two of the texts studied. This question
recorded the worst performance in the entire examination!
Question 21 – Attitudes to the Past
This question proved to be the second least popular theme question behind Question 20, and was attempted
by seven per cent of the candidates. Only one candidate achieved a perfect score and as in previous years,
(c) gave candidates the most difficulty.
The theme questions (15-21) should prove to be easier than Section A questions, since both themes and
texts are known far in advance of the examination. It is difficult to understand why candidates do not
perform better on these questions. While it is not wise or educational for teachers to encourage candidates
to prepare full answers and regurgitate them on examination day, there is nothing to prevent teachers
from ensuring that candidates know precisely how to structure an essay on a theme question. The present
examination encourages and invites teachers and candidates to explore options. Since nothing is compulsory
on the examination, candidates may choose as many as three questions from Section A. With theme and
text(s) known, there is hardly an excuse for inadequate preparation. While teachers cannot vouch for
candidates' familiarity with texts, they can and perhaps ought to provide model answers. There are, of
course, inherent dangers in such a practice, but the advantages are likely to outweigh the disadvantages.
At least candidates can be guided to correlate theme and text(s), since this is so often the key to the quality
of response.
General
As mentioned on page 2, overall performance in 2004 remained stable. The drop in performance in Paper
02 was counterbalanced by an improved performance in Paper 01. Though no candidate wrote a perfect
answer for either Question 1 or Question 2, 9.08 per cent of those answering Question 1 and 13.2 per cent
of those answering Question 2, scored 16 or more.
In the questions on drama, teachers and candidates are reminded that "dramatic importance" is crucial to
any proper appreciation of drama. It is really about structure and discovering what a particular scene is
doing in its desired place and how this placement affects the play. At this level, the emphasis is more on
particular scenes than on the entire play. Beginnings, middles, and endings are always crucial to drama,
poetry, and prose fiction, and questions will reflect the truth of this observation.
Teachers are to be reminded that we are surely moving to an approach to literature that understands the
three modes as related yet distinct. Questions will reflect in one way or another the need to appreciate
how poetry functions as poetry and drama as drama. Questions on novels will reflect the need to understand
the organic relationship between character, theme, setting and language.
Reading prose, drama, and especially poetry, aloud with sensitivity can go a long way towards appreciating
literature. It can make the difference between merely responding to it and understanding how it works.
- 8 -
Paper 02
General Comments
In 2004, against the norm, there were more responses to the poem (Question 2) than to the prose excerpt
(Question 1): 9 294 candidates chose Question 2, while 7 875 candidates responded to Question 1.
Performance on Question 2 was marginally better than on Question 1.
There was no perfect total score in Paper 02, but there was a score of 28 in both questions. Thirteen per
cent of the candidates scored 16 or higher.
Both passages required an understanding of how writers use language to describe and explore the world
of ideas and emotions through imaginative structures.
Although the prose excerpt fictionalized Trinidadian/Caribbean history, both questions demanded of
candidates an understanding of Standard English.
Candidates who were adept at applying this knowledge performed best.
More attention needs to be paid to identification and explanation of figures of speech. Candidates were
able to recognize similes and metaphors, however few recognized examples of puns and paradoxes.
Moreover, while candidates were able to identify the figure of speech, in many instances they were unable
to explain how the figure of speech worked in the given context. This area of weakness is one we would
like to see improve.
There is still a tendency to extrapolate when responding to a critical piece and candidates need to be
reminded that they should confine themselves to responding to the given stimuli, rather than drawing
from extra-textual sources. In using the question as a platform to preach, some candidates became
sidetracked into irrelevance.
- 9 -
1 9451 55 24.73 8
Romeo and Juliet
2 1409 8.21 21.29 9 3 1615 9.41 22.86 1
Taming of the Shrew
4 508 2.96 12.40 0 5 301 1.75 5.65 0
St. Joan
6 254 1.48 12.6 0 7 6415 37.38 47.78 11
To Kill a Mockingbird
8 6598 38.45 59.23 27
9 1330 7.75 44.75 16
Wide Sargasso Sea
10 2186 12.73 35.68 3
11 5740 33.45 24.75 12
World of Prose
12 1439 8.38 30.37 0
13 830 4.83 9.53 1
World of Poetry
14 2561 14.92 19.76 0
THEMES
15 Love and 5243 30.55 12.13 1
Family Relationships
16 Freedom 4020 23.42 24.74 2
17 Heroism 6942 40.45 21.61 4
18 Power and Authority 3544 20.65 9.2 1
19 Dreams and Aspirations 4841 28.21 37.38 5
20 Women in Society 981 5.71 4.79 0
21 Attitude to the Past 1276 7.43 12 1
APPENDIX - 1
Question # Text/Theme No. of Percentage Pecentage No. of
Responses of Candidates Scores of 18+ Perfect Scores
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2005 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
-2-
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2005, the third and final year of this cycle (2003 - 2005), the overall examination performance was quite
consistent with that of 2004. Mark allocations were again indicated for the various parts of each question. This
helped candidates to manage their time more efficiently.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with texts and understanding of them, and displayed
a satisfactory grasp of the mechanics of writing. Still, avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation are
far too common across the board. Teachers and candidates need to be reminded that there is no such word as
“alot” in standard English; and that “all right” is the standard form of the phrase; and that "its" is the possessive
form of the pronoun (Every dog must have its day); and that “it's” is an abbreviated form of “it is.”
Some candidates demonstrated a commendable ability to organize ideas into logical, well-argued paragraphs; to
frame their essays effectively with an introduction and conclusion; and to effect a smooth transition from
quotation to discussion. Too many, however, made little effort to structure their responses. It must be emphasized
that while the candidate is not penalized for sectionalizing responses, more marks are given for a well-developed
essay.
While most candidates performed very well in segments of questions requiring recall, most were not as competent
in analysing texts. Questions that asked for a discussion of the dramatic significance, or for comments on poetic
devices, for instance, tended to be poorly done.
Candidates need to be taught how to read examination questions carefully, and to respond fully or briefly, as
instructed, to all parts. Their attention should be drawn to the meaning of instructional words used in the
examination such as “Comment on,” “Describe,” “Identify,” “Compare,” and “Discuss.” These all require
different responses, and “briefly” means just what it says. They should know, too, that proper names should
ideally be correctly spelt, and the titles of works underlined.
Far too many candidates still disregard the caution that the same text is not to be used to respond to more than
one question, and many continue to use texts that are not on the syllabus. Candidates should be reminded that
they will be penalized for not observing these instructions.
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 8 of the syllabus:
1. Knowledge and Insight (Profile 1)
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of illustration
(c) Quality/Clarity of argument
2. Organizing of Response (Profile 2)
(a) Organizing (Structure and development of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs)
(b) Grammar and mechanics of writing (Sentence structure, punctuation, spelling, diction, etc.)
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
Section A tests
(a) description, analysis (that is, the ability to break down and select relevant data), and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form, information drawn from various sections of the
text), for the purpose of answering a particular question.
-3-
(b) the ability to support an argument based on reference to the text, a response to or opinion about a play,
novel, short story.
(c) an elementary awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, of the writer as a person who employs various
techniques in the shaping of the language and the presentation of human character and behaviour).
(d) an ability to recognize and distinguish between qualities of feeling as presented in a particular test.
(e) a grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
Section B tests
(a) the same skills as indicated for Section A. However, because of its focus on themes and the comparison
of texts, Section B requires an equal measure of analysis but a greater effort at synthesis to answer
questions adequately.
(b) an appreciation of the social content and context of literature.
Skills and Aptitude Tested in Paper 02
This paper tests
(a) comprehension.
(b) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet/dramatist achieves his effect).
These skills require
(a) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function in
the passage.
(b) attention to dramatic devices, for example, stage direction and “props”.
(c) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
(d) awareness of the interaction among characters.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01
Section A – Set Texts – Questions 1 - 14
ROMEO AND JULIET
Question 1
This question required an understanding of a crucial moment that turns around the drama. Candidates were
required to know why Romeo flees to Mantua. Most recalled correctly the fatal duel between Tybalt and
Mercutio, in which Mercutio is killed. Many stated accurately that Romeo feels responsible through his interference
for his friend’s death. Very few remembered that it was Friar Laurence who suggested to Romeo that he go to
Mantua.
Section (b) elicited a few detailed responses, but in the main responses were too generalized.
The vast majority of responses to (c) omitted the Friar’s advice and counsel to Romeo. Everyone mentioned the
potion (called “portion” and “position”) and its effects. Too many, however, gave information beyond the plan.
Question 2
This question required an understanding of the opening scene of the play. This question was generally well
handled; (a) and (b) gave little trouble. Section (c), however, indicated how badly prepared candidates are for
-4-
a question on dramatic significance. Only 8.19 per cent of candidates attempted this question.
Romeo and Juliet proved a popular choice (the second most popular text) and, hence, an appropriate text.
However, there was quite a bit of film interference. Teachers and candidates are reminded that neither video
nor film ought to replace the text, on which questions are set.
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ knowledge of Act 1, Scene 1 of The Taming of the Shrew. Sections (a) and
(b) were well handled by most, but (c) proved difficult to many. Only 6.30 per cent of candidates chose
Question 3.
Question 4
This question required an understanding of the most eagerly awaited moment in The Taming of the Shrew: the
initial meeting between Petruchio and Katherina. Sections (a) and (b) were generally competently handled, but
(c) proved to be the most difficult section of the question. Again, responses evinced how badly prepared
candidates are for questions on dramatic significance. Only 7.80 per cent of candidates chose Question 4.
The Taming of the Shrew was not a popular text with candidates and teachers. This is not surprising, since it
hardly works as text in 2005. Only the most skilful actors can pull it off on stage.
SAINT JOAN
Question 5
This straightforward question tested the candidates’ knowledge of the relationship between Joan and three (3)
other major characters. Neither (a) nor (b) posed any problems for the majority of candidates.
Question 6
This was a more problematic question for candidates. Like its counterpart, it required a knowledge of the
relationship between Joan and three (3) major characters. While (a) posed few problems, (b) was not well
done.
Saint Joan was in 2005, as it was in 2004, the least popular set book.
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
Question 7
This question was reasonably well done by the majority of candidates. Only Miss Maudie’s criticisms posed any
problems.
Question 8
This question was more popular than Question 7 and was well done by the majority of candidates. Candidates
were well prepared for (a), (b) and (c).
-5-
To Kill a Mockingbird proved in the second year of this cycle to be the most popular set text. Its simple,
straightforward, linear narrative proved irresistible to 77.10 per cent of the candidates.
WIDE SARGASSO SEA
Question 9
This question required a knowledge of a particular moment at the end of the novel. While (a) was generally well
handled, (b) posed some difficulties for candidates. Only 8.18 per cent of candidates answered Question 9.
Question 10
Question 10 was more difficult than Question 9 in that it required a knowledge of the role of two women in
Antoinette’s life. Many more candidates chose Question 10 than Question 9, and the majority of candidates did
both (a) and (b) reasonably well. Approximately 15 per cent of candidates chose Question 10.
A WORLD OF PROSE
Question 11
Although Question 11 required a knowledge of only one short story, (b) and (c) proved to be difficult for the
majority of candidates. Both Sections (a) and (b) demanded an understanding of point of view and the significance
of Hughes’ choice of different points of view.
Question 12
Question 12 was better handled than was Question 11 by the majority of candidates. Sections (a) and (b) were
straightforward, but (c) proved difficult for many. Few candidates went beyond the obvious.
Questions 11 and 12 elicited responses from 37 per cent of the candidates, and AWorld of Prose continues to be
an attractive option in Section A.
A WORLD OF POETRY
Questions 13 and 14
Neither Question 13 nor Question 14 was well handled by the majority of candidates. Sections (b) and (c)
proved problematic to many candidates as did (c) in Question 14. However, at least 8 candidates scored full
marks in Question 13 and Question 14.
Happily, AWorld of Poetry continues to hold its own among set texts.
Section B – Themes – Questions 15 - 21
Question 15 – Love and Family Relationships
About 29 per cent of the candidates answered Question 15, and there were a fair number of very good responses.
Candidates handled (a) more comfortably than (b). Choice of texts either positively or adversely affected
performance. Repetition of texts was the downfall of many candidates.
Question 16 – Freedom
Out of the 3 140 candidates who chose to respond to Question 16, approximately 60 per cent scored more than
15 marks. While part (a) posed no real problems, part (b) proved a stiff challenge to candidates who were less
comfortable with comparison than with description, as required in part (a). There were at least 4 perfect
scores.
Question 17 – Heroism
Heroism perennially has been the most popular theme question. This year it proved to be the second most
popular theme question attracting responses from 36 per cent of the candidates.
-6-
Candidates showed a fairly good grasp of both types of heroism, although some chose to show how the same
kind of heroism is illustrated in both texts. Thirty two per cent of candidates scored 15 or higher, and at least 2
candidates scored 29.
Question 18 – Power and Authority
This question elicited responses from 13 per cent of the candidates, only two of whom scored 28, the highest
mark. Thirty three per cent of the candidates scored 15 or more.
Question 19 – Dreams and Aspirations
This question rose in popularity from 2004 to become the most popular theme question. Approximately 46 per
cent of candidates responded to Question 19. Over 60 per cent scored 15 or more, and there were 6 perfect
scores.
Question 20 – Women in Society
This question fell in popularity in 2005. This is surprising in this age of feminism, liberation and the fact that the
question encouraged candidates to demonstrate their understanding of how and why a female character exerts
influence in two of the texts studied. There was at least one perfect score, and 39 per cent of candidates scored
15 or more.
Question 21 – Attitudes to the Past
This question, in the past, has always been unpopular. Again in 2005, Question 21 was the least popular theme
question. Although there were scores of 29, there was not a perfect score.
The theme questions (15-21) should prove to be easier than Section A questions, since both themes and texts are
known far in advance of the examination. It is difficult to understand why candidates do not perform better on
these questions. While it is not wise or educational for teachers to encourage candidates to prepare full answers
and regurgitate them on examination day, there is nothing to prevent teachers from ensuring that candidates
know precisely how to structure an essay on a theme question. The present examination encourages and invites
teachers and candidates to explore options. Since nothing is compulsory on the examination, candidates may
choose as many as three questions from Section A. With theme and text(s) known, there is hardly an excuse for
inadequate preparation. While teachers cannot vouch for candidates' familiarity with texts, they can and perhaps
ought to provide model answers. There are, of course, inherent dangers in such a practice, but the advantages
are likely to outweigh the disadvantages. At least candidates can be guided to correlate theme and text(s), since
this is so often the key to the quality of response.
General
As mentioned on page 2, overall performance in 2005 remained stable. The drop in performance in Paper 02
was counterbalanced by an improved performance in Paper 01. Though no candidate wrote a perfect answer
for either Question 1 or Question 2, 9.08 per cent of those answering Question 1 and 13.2 per cent of those
answering Question 2, scored 16 or more.
In the questions on drama, teachers and candidates are reminded that "dramatic importance" is crucial to any
proper appreciation of drama. It is really about structure and discovering what a particular scene is doing in its
desired place and how this placement affects the play. At this level, the emphasis is more on particular scenes
than on the entire play. Beginnings, middles, and endings are always crucial to drama, poetry, and prose fiction,
and questions will reflect the truth of this observation.
Teachers are to be reminded that we are surely moving to an approach to literature that understands the three
modes as related yet distinct. Questions will reflect in one way or another the need to appreciate how poetry
functions as poetry and drama as drama. Questions on novels will reflect the need to understand the organic
relationship between character, theme, setting and language.
-7-
Reading prose, drama, and especially poetry aloud with sensitivity can take one a long way towards appreciating
literature. It can make the difference between merely responding to it and understanding how it works.
Paper 02
General Comments
In 2005, there were more responses to the prose extract (Question 2) than to the poem (Question 1): 12 432
candidates chose Question 2, while 6 841 candidates responded to Question 1. It was surprising that so many
candidates chose what proved to be the more difficult question.
Six candidates got a perfect score on Question 1, while only one received a perfect score on Question 2.
Both passages required an understanding of how writers use language to describe and explore the world of
ideas and emotions through imaginative structures.
More attention needs to be paid to identification and explanation of figures of speech. Candidates were able to
recognize similes and metaphors; however, few recognized examples of puns and paradoxes. Moreover, while
candidates were able to identify the figure of speech, in many instances they were unable to explain how the
figure of speech worked in the given context. This area of weakness is one in which the examiners would like
to see an improvement.
There is still a tendency to extrapolate when responding to a critical piece and candidates need to be reminded
that they should confine themselves to responding to the given stimuli, rather than drawing from extra-textual
sources. In using the question as a platform to preach, some candidates became sidetracked into irrelevance.
-8-
APPENDIX – 1
Question # Text/Theme No. of Percentage
Responses of Candidates
1 7418 61.8
Romeo and Juliet
2 983 8.19
3 757 6.30
Taming of the Shrew 4 936 7.80
5 162 1.35
St. Joan
6 174 1.45
7 3453 28.70
To Kill a Mockingbird 8 5688 47.40
9 982 8.18
Wide Sargasso Sea 10 1760 14.60
11 2619 14.80
World of Prose
12 2619 21.80
13 788 6.50
World of Poetry 14 1086 9.05
THEMES
15 Love and 2280 19.00
Family Relationships
16 Freedom 3140 26.10
17 Heroism 4365 36.30
18 Power and Authority 1573 13.10
19 Dreams and Aspirations 6416 53.40
20 Women in Society 1193 9.90
21 Attitude to the Past 1052 8.70
N.B. Numbers and percentages are based on 70% of candidate population.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2006
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2006 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2006
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2006, the first year of the first cycle of the new syllabus (2006-2008) the overall examination performance
declined from that of 2005. In 2006 44.65 per cent of candidates achieved Grades III and above compared
with 58.93 per cent in 2005. Mark allocations were indicated for the various parts of the questions on drama
and on poetry. Mark allocations were not indicated for the prose questions, so students faced an additional
challenge here of structuring the essay without guidance.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with the texts, and there was evidence of an
increased personal involvement with the material and an emotional response to the conflicts and struggles
being discussed. Avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation were still too frequent. Teachers
should ensure that students can spell words that they will inevitably need when writing on a specific text:
Macbeth, for instance, stole the throne (not thrown), he was a valiant soldier (not “solider”) and he was misled
by the witches’ prophecies (not “profisies”) or some such variant). The spelling of proper names should be
mastered before the examination, and titles of texts should be underlined.
Some candidates demonstrated excellent ability in organising their responses into logical, well-developed
paragraphs and used smooth transitions to form those paragraphs into a well-crafted essay, complete with an
introduction and a conclusion. They were able to introduce relevant quotations and move from quotation to
discussion. Too many candidates, though, wrote sectionalised responses to the different parts of the question
(sometimes even on separate pages) instead of using the question breakdown to shape their responses into
a flowing essay.
Again this year, parts of questions that required simple recall were generally done well, but weaker candidates
were not so competent when called on to analyse situations. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic
devices or poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the “story”.
Since this new syllabus is genre-based, it is important for teachers to guide students to examine dramatic and
poetic devices and to be able to discuss their effectiveness. A large number of students simply omitted the part
of the question requiring comments on dramatic or poetic devices. Candidates need to be reminded of the
importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in the prose fiction section where there is no
sectionalising to prompt them. Words such as “Comment on”, “Identify”, “Discuss”, “Compare” require different
responses, and candidates must be taught how to answer such questions.
Teachers should discuss with students the importance of care in selecting their questions. This year many
candidates opted to do questions for which they were unprepared—particularly in the prose fiction section of
the paper. The question which dealt with a schooldays experience, for instance, was not suitable if the candidate
was prepared to write only on The Pearl and Green Days by the River. Students also need to be taught, to focus
on the specific requirements of the question and answer each part as thoroughly as possible with supporting
evidence from the text—not to narrate the story, and not to write everything they know whether relevant or not.
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. Quite a large number of
candidates wrote on both of the plays, wasting time and losing marks in the process.
- 3 -
The following table shows a breakdown of the candidates’ choices.
APPENDIX - 1
No Percentage
 Question # Text of Responses of Candidates
Drama 1 Macbeth 8161 42.3
 2 5917 30.7
 3 Glass Menagerie 1523 7.9
 4 3714 19.2
Poetry 5 World of Poetry 16246 84.2
 6 2761 14.3
Prose 7 9525 49.4
 8 * 6420 33.3
 9 1271 6.6
10 1841 9.5
* Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for comparison from
the following:
West Indian
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony
Non West Indian
A Separate Peace John Knowles
The Pearl John Steinbeck
Intention of Questions
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus:
Understanding
Knowledge of Text and Insight
i) Relevance and adequacy of content
ii) Relevance and accuracy of examples
Expression
Organisation of Response
i) Structure and development of responses
ii) Clear and logical argument
- 4 -
Quality of Language
i) Clarity and appropriateness of expression used
ii) Mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling)
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
This paper tests
i) comprehension
ii) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
These skills require
i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function
effectively in the passage.
ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and “props”.
iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
iv) awareness of the interaction among characters.
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus)
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts
explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living.
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question).
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism.
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses.
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested throughout
the examination and most particularly in Paper 02.
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text.
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
General Comments on Student Performance in Paper 01
Because this new syllabus is genre-specific, it will be necessary for teachers to devote more time to dealing
with poetic and dramatic devices, and to look more closely at the strategies used by prose writers—setting,
characterization, dialogue, and so on. Students have to be sensitised to the undercurrents of mood, conflict and
irony in drama, and need to understand how the stage directions function. In poetry, they need to be enabled to
recognise when metaphoric language is being used, and not insist on a literal reading.
- 5 -
A few candidates attempted to write in essay format in Paper 1. Students need to be advised that each answer
should be written on a separate line. In addition, each genre should start on a new page.
Question 1: Drama
Most candidates responded with compassion to the situation of Annie and Carlton. Many candidates did not
understand that Annie wanted a job, but went for limited responses: she needed bread, money or a place to
stay. In responding to Question (c) about Jean’s entrance, many candidates confused entrance with presence,
and commented on the effect on Annie of Jean’s entrance instead of the change of mood that would affect the
audience. Few candidates gained full marks on Question (d) which required them to examine the words “gentle
irony” (i.e. both gentle and ironic), and some students did not know the meaning of “radiant” and so had
difficulty with Question (e). For Question (f) few candidates saw the contrast between Carlton and Jean (e.g.
class) and some did not understand the word “impact.” A few candidates gained full marks for this last question.
Question 2: Poetry
Question (a), many candidates kept to the literal level, not seeing the sleep/death metaphor in the poem.
Others, misreading the poem in another way, maintained that the forest imagery was the literal meaning of the
poem, and for Question (e) they discussed “process” using terms like deforestation, evaporation, condensation
and photosynthesis. This tendency to hold on to a perceived literal meaning proved the downfall of many
candidates.
Question 3: Prose
Candidates evidently found this passage exciting, and responses for the most part were satisfactory. Many,
though, did not realise that Jonathan was a seagull. Many did not understand the phrase “terminal velocity”
Question (c), and many could not identify examples of poetic language in the passage or explain what was
poetic about those examples.
Paper 02
Section A – Drama – Questions 1 - 4
MACBETH
Too many candidates attempted questions on both of the plays. Only one question must be selected from
this section.
Question 1
This question required an understanding of Macbeth’s guilty fears and his ambitious desires after the killing of
Duncan. It also required an understanding of irony as a literary device, and invited the candidate to link
Macbeth’s illicit rise to power with his tragic downfall, so tracing the justice implicit in the unfolding of
events. The section on irony proved difficult for some candidates, and weaker ones tended to provide vague
comments on the topic of justice, not providing specific supporting evidence from the play.
Question 2
This question focused on Macduff’s motive for revenge and his role in Macbeth’s downfall. Many candidates
ignored the words “at that time”, and wrote about Macbeth’s fears of Macduff later in the play. Section (b) was
generally adequately done, but section (c) proved challenging. Candidates were sometimes not able to distinguish
between Macduff’s role and his suitability as an avenger. Most dealt well with the rallying of forces against the
tyrant and with Macduff’s personal revenge; only the better students understood that Macduff, since he himself
was not going to be king, was God’s righteous tool in delivering Scotland from the usurper.
- 6 -
Candidates were almost unanimous in describing Macduff as having been born by Caesarean section. Surely,
though, “from his mother’s womb untimely ripp’d” presents us with a much less sanitised image; presumably
he was either cut from his mother after her death or he miraculously survived when his mother’s belly was
brutally ripped open by invading soldiers.
Candidates need to know that the words “Say whether he is a fit avenger” require more than a yes/no response.
Supporting evidence is always required.
THE GLASS MENAGERIE
Question 3
Candidates were asked to say what could be learnt from the setting as the curtain rises on the play, to relate the
sequence of events in the first scene and to outline the major themes that emerge in this scene. Most were able
to identify aspects of setting, but did not say what we could learn from them. Most were able to relate the
events, though not in the correct order, and some drew on material from outside this scene. The last part of the
question tended to be poorly done, with candidates listing the “themes” from the last syllabus (love and family
relationships, freedom, power and authority, etc.) without linking them to what they observed in the events and
setting of this scene.
Question 4
This question focused on the influence of men on powerful women (Mr Wingfield/Amanda) and oppressed
women (Jim/ Laura). The most challenging part of the question was the section in which candidates were
required to say how Williams makes Wingfield’s influence appear “dramatically striking”. Here it became
evident that the play’s dramatic devices had not been adequately dealt with by teachers. Many candidates
correctly identified the life-size photo of Wingfield as an example of a device that is “dramatically striking”,
but ignored the prompt telling them that 6 marks were available, and failed to expand on the impact of the
photo.
Section B – Poetry – Questions 5 - 6
General comments.
Examiners noticed a widespread absence of any evidence that candidates were being taught to read poetry as
a genre. Many candidate scored their marks on the (a) and (b) parts of the poetry questions, but were very
weak on the (c) part, the part that tests for understanding of the genre. Many candidates had no idea what an
image was and gave narrative instead of image in answer to Question 5c. The narrative merely repeated the
material in parts (a) or (b), the basic recall and comprehension sections.
Some candidates who were able to correctly select images, did not know what to do with them, so they simply
listed or paraphrased the relevant quotations. Others were a bit stronger and were able to say what the effect of
the image was, but very few were able to say HOW the image worked to achieve this effect. It is important that
students be taught the basic vocabulary of poetry (terms such as ‘image’ for example cannot be given layman’s
interpretations), be able to identify and NAME basic figures of speech (e.g. simile, metaphor, alliteration), be
able to identify basic structural devices (repetition, rhyme) and be able to explain HOW in particular poems these
devices work to create certain meanings and effects. This does not mean students are expected to exhibit the
sophistication of a CAPE student. But the fact that significant numbers were able to handle Section c of both
questions indicates that these requirements are not unrealistic. They are in fact an excellent preparation for
CAPE.
- 7 -
Question 5
Students clearly enjoyed these two poems and wrote with conviction. However, they need to be taught the
skills of writing a comparative analysis. Many listed the characteristics of one mother and then those of the
other instead of finding points of comparison to show the ways in which the two women are similar/are
different.
Question 6
Martin Carter’s poem proved more accessible to students than Auden’s. Candidates were able to identify the
oppressors, but were not so sure about what they do. The section requiring candidates to say what makes the
oppressors appear mysterious was clearly problematic. Candidates generally wrote fairly well on the horror
communicated in each poem. A number of candidates were able to write well on the way Auden uses the sonnet
form to achieve his purpose, and many, too, were able to discuss the effect of the oxymorons and other devices
that Carter employs.
Section C – Prose Fiction – Questions 7 – 10
General Comments
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. Texts
from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. Students
must be advised on choosing a question appropriate to the two texts they wish to write on. To choose The Pearl
to write about an experience from schooldays was plain foolhardy!
Students must be taught to focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story of the
novel. The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is
used explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring out
points of similarity and difference.
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalised, candidates need to be guided by teachers on how to
structure their essays. Generally each essay will fall into four parts—two parts for each novel. For instance, in
Question 7, it was necessary (a) to identify and explain the challenge faced, and then (b) to show the ways in
which the major character moved to maturity as he/she faced that challenge. In Question 8, the candidate
needed (a) to describe the way that class prejudice expressed itself in the society depicted, and then (b) to show
how the major character was affected by that prejudice. Students need to be shown how to read the question,
to break it down into its component sections and then to write about each section as fully as possible. A
reasonable rule of thumb would be to assume approximately equal marks for each of the four sections.
Generally it was found that candidates had a grasp of the story line, but often had not taken time to probe into
the deep conflicts and moral questions beneath the surface. More class discussion of issues presented in the
novels seems to be called for.
Question 7
Candidates who did well in this question were those who were able to identify life’s challenges and analyse
ways in which dealing with those challenges had transformed the major character into a mature person. They
were able to “use” the novels to support the points they made and presented their points in a clear, logical
manner.
- 8 -
Question 8
Surprisingly few candidates used Crick Crack Monkey to respond to this question, though it would have been
eminently suitable, and many used A Separate Peace , which was certainly not the wisest choice. Social class
was not always identified. Misreadings abounded: Kino in The Pearl was considered to be “greedy” instead of
ambitious, and was accused of “wanting to be like the same whites he despised”; Mr Gidharee in Green Days
was seen as an “exploiter/manipulator” rather than as being interested in Shell’s welfare. Candidates working
with Crick Crack Monkey compared Tantie and Aunt Beatrice instead of addressing the question.
Question 9
Only A Separate Peace and Crick Crack Monkey were suitable choices for this question, and students who
chose the other two texts handicapped themselves from the outset. Surprisingly, since it asked for discussion of
a schooldays experience, the question was generally not well done. Quite a few candidates moved away from
the novels to relate their own schooldays experiences. They need to be reminded that while literature often
mirrors our own experiences, all examples supporting points made must be from the literary texts.
Question 10
This question on setting was well done, which suggests that teachers are focusing more on the techniques of
the novelist. This is encouraging. Green Days and The Pearl were the popular choices, though A Separate
Peace allowed for rich discussion by candidates who had fully understood the symbolism used extensively in
this novel.
General
Overall performance in 2006 remained stable. Candidates tended to do better in Paper 1 than in Paper 2. This
is probably because students need more help with essay-writing skills. In the poetry questions, particularly,
more development of points was required. Narration was a problem in the responses to questions on prose
fiction.
Teachers are reminded that this syllabus focuses on the three genres, and candidates will be examined
accordingly. For drama, candidates need to be able to consider a given scene in detail and show how its events,
mood and placement contribute to the play. For poetry, candidates need to be able to identify and discuss the
effectiveness of poetic devices and to move from quotation to analysis. For prose fiction, candidates need to
move away from re-telling the story to focusing on the requirements of the question. Aspects of the novel like
character, conflict, theme, and language all need to be discussed in the classroom. In all three genres, candidates
should be urged to write their answers in well-constructed, logically flowing essays; it is not satisfactory for
them to present a sectionalised answer.
C A R I B B E A N E X AM I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON THE CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE 
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2007 
ENGLISH B 
- 2 - 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
JUNE 2007 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
In 2007, approximately 19,363 candidates wrote the examination. This examination, the second for the revised 
syllabus, showed a significant improvement in candidates’ performance. In 2006, 44.68 per cent of the 
candidates achieved Grades I - III. This number increased significantly in 2007 with 70.26 per cent achieving 
Grades I - III. 
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with the texts, and there was evidence of an 
increased personal involvement with the material and an emotional response to the conflicts and struggles being 
discussed. 
Again this year, parts of questions that required simple recall were generally done well, but weaker candidates 
were not so competent when called on to analyse situations. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic devices 
or poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the “story”. Since this 
new syllabus is genre-based, it is important for teachers to guide students to examine dramatic and poetic 
devices and to be able to discuss their effectiveness. A large number of candidates simply omitted the part of the 
question requiring comments on dramatic or poetic devices. 
Candidates need to be reminded of the importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in the 
prose fiction section where there is no sectionalizing to prompt them. Words such as “Comment on”, “Identify”, 
“Discuss”, “Compare” require different responses, and “briefly” means just that. 
Students need to be taught to focus on the specific requirements of the question and answer each part as 
thoroughly as possible with supporting evidence from the text – not to narrate the story, and not to write 
everything they know whether relevant or not. 
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. 
Intention of Questions 
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus: 
Understanding 
Knowledge of Text and Insight 
 (i) relevance and adequacy of content 
 (ii) relevance and accuracy of examples 
Expression 
Organization of Response 
 (i) structure and development of responses 
 (ii) clear and logical argument 
- 3 - 
Quality of Language 
 (i) clarity and appropriateness of expression used 
 (ii) mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling) 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01 
This paper tests 
 (i) comprehension 
 (ii) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
These skills require 
 (i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage 
 (ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and “props” 
 (iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 (iv) awareness of the interaction among characters 
 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus) 
 (i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; 
to make a rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living. 
 (ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections 
of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question). 
 (iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism. 
 (iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses. 
 (v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in 
the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 2. 
 (vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular 
text. 
 (vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
- 4 - 
Paper 01 
Comments on Candidates’ Performance
 
Question 1: Drama
 
Overwhelmingly, candidates demonstrated their understanding and appreciation of the immediacy of the drama, 
as they responded energetically to the episode. They recognized the need to infer the feelings of the characters 
from the stage directions as indicated by the question, and linked the evidence to the feelings of excitement, 
tension and anxiety. A major contribution of the study of literature is to enable students to name and distinguish 
emotions and feelings. Some candidates did not get beyond the cliché of ‘having the spirit of carnival’ or the 
‘carnival feeling’. Some demonstrated an inability to use evidence to support their estimate of Pa’s importance 
in the household. Conclusions that Pa was the sole breadwinner cannot be supported by ‘your father’s costume 
take every cent we had.’ Exercises to make inferences from evidence are invaluable in all genres. Thankfully, 
the vast majority of candidates were able to demonstrate mastery of this skill on this occasion. Determining the 
conflict in this scene required analysis of the evidence. Most candidates recognized the central point of conflict, 
and full marks, achieved by many, were awarded for identifying the underlying cause. Most candidates 
correctly identified excitement and tension as the best description of the atmosphere, but some did not use the 
evidence from the two main characters to justify their answer. The marks allocated to a question is a useful 
guide to the fullness of an expected answer, The purpose of Question 1 (e) was to test candidates’ appreciation 
of the extract as a scene to be viewed on stage. A candidate could have scored three marks for any three of the 
following: 
• the music; 
• the humorous drunken song at the beginning; 
• the quarrel between Ursula and Marilyn adding tension; 
• the suspense wondering whether Pa will support Marilyn against Ursula; 
• Marilyn's dancing; 
• the contrast between the merriment outside and the tension within; 
• the suspense wondering what exactly Pa’s costume is for; 
• the suspense wondering if Marilyn will get to play mas; 
• any other reasonable answer focusing on dramatic qualities (effect on watching audience) 
Many candidates had difficulty in distinguishing between the carnival excitement that happens unseen offstage 
and the anxiety that predominates onstage. Performance on the drama was considerably better than last year. 
The mean performance increased from 5.77 in 2006 to 10.59 in 2007. 
 
Question 2: Poetry
 
The responses revealed that most candidates struggled with the experience of the poem this year. While most 
candidates correctly identified the ‘arms’ as bayonet-blade, bullet heads and cartridges or their synonyms, some 
candidates did not recognize this central idea and were therefore handicapped. The speaker was suggesting that 
the boy should examine the arms and understand the damage they can cause. Many candidates strained 
reasonable interpretation when they extrapolated that the boy was forced to be a heartless mass murderer. While 
most candidates were able to identify an example of personification, they were unable to comment adequately 
on its effectiveness. While some adept abstract-thinking poetry readers indicated courage, endurance and 
maturity as the things the boy lacks, many restated what was mentioned in the poem but found difficulty in 
explaining why his lacking them was significant. The use of the language of suggestion was tested in (e) but not 
many were able to identify appropriate phrases. Candidates could have scored the full two marks for any two of 
the following:
• His teeth seem for laughing round an apple 
- 5 - 
• To stroke 
• Nuzzle in the hearts of lad - suggests cuddling 
• Fingers supple 
• Thickness of curls 
Question 3: Prose
 
The delightful prose passage posed some difficulty for candidates. Most candidates were able to earn at least 
two marks by providing evidence from what they learnt about the narrator from the first three paragraphs. 
Evidence that the narrator and her sister were from a mixed cultural heritage required mention of both American 
and Haitian roots, and the passage abounds with evidence of cultural practices, values, beliefs, celebrations and 
cuisine. The cause of the conflict between Ma and the girls was represented by a specific event, their request to 
be pall bearers, which heightened the ongoing conflict of values between the generations. Many candidates 
identified the specific incident but ignored the underlying cause. Most candidates were able to identify cases of 
Ma’s speech without the quotation marks, but the use of italics for emphasis, irony or sarcasm was not widely 
understood. Generally, candidates’ inability to earn the maximum in responding to one way in which the father 
is significant reflects the need for a greater teaching focus on strategies of close reading of prose extracts, 
demonstrating knowledge of structure, point of view, contrast of characters, episode and theme elaboration, each 
of which could be exploited in this case. 
Paper 02 
General Comments on Candidates’ Performance 
Since two of the questions on this paper are comparative analyses, it is important for candidates to be trained in 
the skills of structuring a comparative essay. Candidates need to be instructed on how to read a question 
carefully, paying attention to each section, and, where applicable, noting the proportion of marks being awarded. 
They should be encouraged to use the sections in the questions as a guide to structuring their essays, but 
should not present their response in segments—and certainly not with each segment on a separate page. 
Vocabulary building is necessary; students need not merely to be able to identify an example of a character’s 
typical behaviour or an example of mood shift, but should be able to name the character trait or mood that is 
being illustrated. Names of people and places should be correctly spelt, and problem spellings should be 
anticipated and prepared for. Correct spelling of words like throne, soldier, prophecy, heir can be taught, for 
example, when preparing candidates to answer a question on Macbeth. 
For the Poetry section, it is important for candidates not only to identify and give an example of a figure of 
speech, but also to discuss its effectiveness in that poem. 
For the Drama section, it is important for candidates not only to know in detail what takes place in any particular 
scene, but to be able to connect that scene with the entire play in terms of plot, theme, character revelation, 
mood and conflict. 
Section A - Drama 
Questions 1 - 4
Too many candidates attempted questions on both of the plays. Only one question may be selected from this 
section. Teaching should prepare candidates to discuss the relationship of a particular scene to the total effect of 
the play. Candidates need not merely to be able to recount the events or describe character; they should be able 
to comment on dramatic techniques such as contrast, irony, foreshadowing, suspense, etc., and, in modern plays, 
on the stage setting, use of lighting, music, costumes, and so on. 
- 6 - 
Candidates should be reminded that the segments in the questions are intended to guide in essay planning. Too 
many candidates ignore the instruction to write each answer in essay format. 
MACBETH 
Question 1
This question focused on the mental and moral deterioration of Macbeth during the course of the play. 
Candidates generally scored well in part (a), which asked for the circumstances and motive in four killings 
carried out or ordered by Macbeth. In part (b), where they were asked to find evidence of his mental and moral 
deterioration, some candidates were less confident, and many failed to differentiate between mental, on the one 
hand, and moral on the other. It was clear that many candidates could easily recall Macbeth’s actions, but had 
not gone to the next stage of evaluating them. The final section tended to be poorly done: candidates knew 
when they felt admiration or sympathy for the protagonist, but were quite at sea when asked to comment on the 
effect of Shakespeare’s strategy in manipulating our emotions. Time management was also a problem, and 
candidates need to be aware of the marks available for each section of the question. 
Question 2
This was the less popular of the two Macbeth questions, and it was generally handled slightly less competently 
than Question 1. This may have been because it focused on a small, more specific, portion of the play. 
Candidates were able to outline the events in the scene identified, but had difficulty naming the various moods 
created – possibly a matter of limited vocabulary rather than of insensitivity. Most candidates managed to show 
the contrast between Lady Macbeth and Lady Macduff, though weaker candidates did not understand 
“contrasted”, and tried instead to find similarities between the two women. Most candidates were able to 
connect the events in the scene to Macduff’s role as avenger in the final battle. 
THE GLASS MENAGERIE 
Question 3
This question focused on Amanda’s character and her role in the tragic events in this play. Candidates were 
mostly able to recall in detail the incident referred to in the prompt quotation. In the second section of the 
question, they were generally able to illustrate Amanda’s character traits, but not to name them. This inability 
appears to result from limited vocabulary, and, perhaps, non-familiarity with the word “traits”. The final 
section, in which candidates were required to show how Amanda’s character traits contribute to the tragedy 
within her family, was poorly done on the whole. Again, the pattern emerged that candidates were able to 
handle recall questions, but were weaker when it came to analysis. 
Question 4
This question required the candidates to discuss the psychological implications of family relationships in the 
play. Most candidates were able to give evidence of Laura’s inferiority complex. Most were less comfortable 
applying the comment to Tom – some candidates apparently being thrown off course by the fact that Tom is not 
present when the comment is made. Certainly detecting a sense of inferiority in Tom takes more insight than 
detecting the same problem in Laura, and Tom, of course, fights hard to preserve his self-esteem. Predictably, 
part (c), requiring a comment on “significance and dramatic effect”, was poorly answered. Candidates need to 
step back from the words and actions of any particular scene and ask themselves how the part contributes to the 
whole; they must be able to discuss the dramatic impact of any specific moment in the play. Terms like irony, 
climax, foreshadowing must be part of the candidate’s working vocabulary. 
- 7 - 
Section B – Poetry 
Questions 5 - 6
General comments 
There is room for improvement in the teaching of poetry. For Question 6, there were too many scripts in which 
candidates totally misinterpreted both poems. For Question 5, some candidates submitted opinions based on 
experiences extraneous to the poems. Many candidates scored their good marks on the (a) and (b) parts of the 
poetry questions, but were very weak on the (c) part, the part that tests for understanding of the genre. 
Candidates tended to be unable to name devices used in the poems, or, if they knew the name of a device, were 
unable to provide an example of that device. Others named a device and gave an example, but were unable to 
comment on how the device functioned in that particular poem. Many candidates merely quoted parts of the 
poem that were particularly striking and commented on them, but were not able to actually name the device 
being used. 
It is important that students be taught the basic vocabulary of poetry, be able to identify and NAME figures of 
speech (e.g. simile, metaphor, alliteration), be able to identify basic structural devices (repetition, rhyme) and be 
able to explain HOW in particular poems these devices work to create certain meanings and effects. 
The classroom experience of a poem should include discussion of point of view, tone, allusion, imagery, irony, 
contrast, the appropriateness of the title, and other such devices. 
Question 5
Candidates clearly enjoyed these two poems and wrote with enthusiasm. However, they need to be taught the 
skills of writing a comparative analysis. Candidates tended to deal with first one and then the other poem, with 
little attention to comparison. Some candidates misinterpreted item b) ii (Comment on the effects on the 
children), and offered a general discussion of the benefits of discipline instead of confining their observations to 
the content of the poems. The section on poetic devices proved the most challenging. 
Question 6
Generally well done. Again, the first two sections of the question, which required recall and comprehension, 
were handled far better than section c), which asked for a discussion of poetic devices. It is important for 
candidates to be able to identify devices/techniques used by the poet, and to discuss their effectiveness in the 
poem being analysed. Fewer candidates attempted this question than did Question 5, but performance in 
Question 6 was slightly better. 
Section C – Prose Fiction 
Questions 7-12
The Examining Committee learnt that not all examination centres had distributed the erratum sheet that 
accompanied this year’s examination paper (Paper 2). To deal with this problem, a decision was made to accept 
answers to any of the six questions (four on the original paper and two on the erratum sheet). 
In the comments that follow, the questions on the erratum sheet are re-numbered 11 and 12 to prevent confusion. 
- 8 - 
General comments 
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. Texts 
from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. Many 
candidates wrote on the “novels” Macbeth and The Glass Menagerie. 
Candidates must be taught to focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story. They 
should avoid trying to answer all four questions in one essay. 
The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is used 
explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring out points of 
similarity and difference. 
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalized, candidates need to be guided by teachers on how to 
structure their essays. Many candidates also need guidance on correct paragraphing. 
Candidates should be encouraged to study all four of the novels on the syllabus, and should be taught to use 
their reading time to select a question carefully. Story-telling should be avoided, proper names should be 
correctly spelt, and titles should be underlined. 
Question 7
This question allowed candidates to explore the dynamics of relationships. The better candidates understood that 
the question required them to see the positive and negative elements in ONE relationship, and they handled this 
well. Weaker candidates tended to discuss one relationship that was “joyous and fulfilling”, and a different 
relationship that was “sorrowful and burdensome”—missing the point of the question. 
Question 8
This question focused on the difficulties of growing up as experienced by a major character in both a West 
Indian and a non-West Indian novel. Some candidates ignored the instruction to focus on a major character, and 
selected a minor figure instead. The main weaknesses in responses to this question were story-telling instead of 
analysis and failure to structure the essay as a comparison. 
Question 9
There were not many superior responses for this question. Many candidates were able to identify family 
relationships but could not say how the relationship affected a major character. In fact, many candidates gave 
confusing answers and failed to focus on the question. Some candidates limited their discussion to a relationship 
of the major character with only one other family member, and this sometimes negatively affected their scores. 
Question 10
Candidates were asked to discuss ways in which a major character in each of the texts selected was affected by 
the illness or death of someone close to him/her. The more thoughtful responses focused on the psychological 
effects of dealing with sickness or death of someone close while the weaker responses confined their discussion 
to physical changes that resulted. In the latter case, essays tended to slide into story-telling instead of analysing 
the deeper consequences of coping with these difficult experiences. 
- 9 - 
Question 11
Candidates who understood what was meant by “landscape” tended to do very well on this question; they had 
evidently been well prepared. Too many candidates simply did not know what the term means, and used it 
synonymously with physical or social environment – especially those who wrote on Crick Crack Monkey. 
Many candidates wrote about the behaviour of characters rather than about changes in attitude and personality. 
Some very good responses dealt with the evident symbolism in the landscape in, for instance, Green Days by the 
River and A Separate Peace. Responses on The Pearl and Crick Crack Monkey were not generally very good. 
Question 12
This was by far the most popular prose question. The question invited candidates to consider the way a major 
character copes with a challenge during the course of the novel, but still has more problems to deal with as the 
novel draws to an end. Misinterpretations of the question abounded, with many candidates dealing with one 
challenge faced early in the novel and several more towards the end of the novel. Responses that ranged over a 
series of challenges tended to fall into story-telling. Some candidates selected characters that were inappropriate 
to the discussion: Leper, Juana, Tantie, for instance. Nevertheless, some of the better candidates came to grips 
with the requirements of the question, and discussed the fact that, even after dealing with one big challenge, 
Gene has to go on living with his guilty memories, Kino has to rebuild his life after the loss of his son, Tee has 
no sense of identity as she migrates to England, and Shell faces many difficulties as he enters married life with 
Rosalie. 
Appendix 1 shows the Analysis of the candidates’ responses. 
General 
Overall performance in 2007 showed a significant improvement over that of 2006. In Paper 01, the drama 
question was done better than either poetry or prose, which seemed to present equal difficulty to candidates. In 
Paper 02, candidates performed similarly in each of the three genres. 
- 10 - 
APPENDIX – 1 
Question # Text No of 
Responses 
Percentage of 
Candidates 
Drama 
1 11148 57.5 
2 
Macbeth
2191 11.3 
3 1455 7.5 
4 
Glass Menagerie 
4592 23.7 
Poetry 
5 11594 59.8 
6 
World of Poetry 
7624 39.3 
Prose Fiction * 
7 4424 22.8 
8 4023 20.7 
9 981 5.0 
10 1185 6.1 
11 914 4.7 
12 7788 40.2 
*Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for comparison from 
the following: 
West Indian 
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge 
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony 
Non West Indian 
A Separate Peace John Knowles 
The Pearl John Steinbeck 
C A R I B B E A N E X AM I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON THE CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2008 
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2007 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
JUNE 2008 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
In 2008, the final year of the first cycle of the new syllabus (2006-2008) the overall examination 
performance was slightly below that of 2007. Mark allocations were indicated for the various parts of the 
questions on drama and on poetry, and candidates were able to respond to the weighting given to each 
section. Mark allocations were not indicated for the prose questions, so in this Profile candidates were 
given greater latitude for structuring their responses. 
Candidates were generally quite familiar with the texts, and there was pleasing evidence of personal 
involvement with the material as candidates responded with enthusiasm and emotion to the conflicts and 
issues raised.
Again this year, parts of questions requiring simple recall were consistently done well, but analysis of 
situations proved difficult for weaker candidates. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic devices or 
poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the ―story‖; 
however, a number of superior scripts suggest that students are well able to master these aspects of 
literary studies once they are carefully taught. It was heartening to note that most candidates can name 
various devices though they often failed to identify the device in the text. Discussion of the effectiveness 
of the device in conveying the theme of the work tended to be a challenge for all but the really good 
candidates. On the whole, candidates tended to score low marks in sections of the questions requiring 
comments on dramatic or poetic devices. 
Although questions are sectionalized, candidates need to be reminded that their responses should be in 
essay format. Far too many candidates sectionalize their responses—even putting the sections on separate 
pages in their answer booklets. There is need, too, for students to be taught techniques for producing 
flowing essays; connectives were noticeably absent, particularly where candidates were attempting 
comparisons. 
Candidates need to be reminded of the importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in 
the prose fiction section where there is no sectionalizing to prompt them. They should also be guided by 
the number of marks allotted to each section, ensuring that they provide a full response when several 
marks are available. 
It was evident that many candidates did not understand prompt words such as ―Comment on‖, ―Identify‖, 
―Explain‖, ―Discuss‖, ―Compare‖. Students need to be taught to focus on the specific requirements of the 
question and answer each part as thoroughly as possible with supporting evidence from the text—not to 
narrate the story, and not to write everything they know whether relevant or not. When the question asks 
for the candidate‘s opinion (―Which of the two poems do you find more disturbing?‖), the response must 
be supported by evidence from the text; it is not acceptable in a literature examination for the candidate 
merely to draw from personal experience. 
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. 
Intention of Questions
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus:
Understanding 
- 3 -
Knowledge of Text and Insight
 (i) relevance and adequacy of content 
(ii) relevance and accuracy of examples 
Expression 
Organization of Response 
(i) structure and development of responses 
(ii) clear and logical argument 
Quality of Language 
 (i) clarity and appropriateness of expression used 
(ii) mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling) 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01 
This paper tests 
 (i) comprehension 
(ii) awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
These skills require
 (i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage. 
 (ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and ―props‖
(iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
(iv) awareness of the interaction among characters
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus) 
 (i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and 
plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness 
and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living. 
 (ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis 
(the ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various 
sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question). 
(iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism. 
(iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses. 
- 4 -
 (v) The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques 
in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is 
tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 2. 
(vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text. 
(vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature. 
Comments on Student Performance in Paper 1 
 
When compared with the last two years, the questions on the 2008 Paper 01 reflected a greater focus on 
understanding literary techniques and their effectiveness in the genre rather than questions testing 
understanding of concepts embedded in the extracts. 
More marks were also allocated to questions that demanded a higher level of interpretation and analysis. 
Teachers and candidates should note that this trend in the weighting of marks in Paper 01 will continue. 
Average performance in Drama (6.18) was better than Poetry (5.54) or Prose (5.03) and this surprisingly 
disappointing performance belied the engagement with the experiences in the extracts which many if not 
most candidates displayed. Candidates are clearly excited by the extracts. What they need to display now 
is disciplined thought in response to the questions. 
The first two questions on the drama allowed candidates who were most discriminating to gain maximum 
marks by providing complete details. They recognized that patrons were normally expected in the shop 
and this earned the third mark as they also mentioned the two named characters. Most candidates earned 
2 of the three marks for identifying two named characters. The same gradation occurred in response to 
(b) with the more discerning candidates who recognized and mentioned Petit Belle Lily‘s different 
interest to the love relationship thus earning the full 2 marks. 
This trend was even more marked in candidates‘ responses to (c) and (d) which tested candidates‘ 
understanding of the drama as a staged performance. In (c) candidates who included both the 
‗preparation for‘ and the ‗crowning of‘ the stick-fighting champion earned the full 2 marks. Candidates 
were able to earn marks for citing appropriate evidence which is replete in the stage directions as well as 
in the action of Briscoe and his conversation with Joe. Dramatic techniques and candidates‘ comments on 
their effectiveness were the focus of (d), and here only an exceptional few earned total marks. We cannot 
overstress that the focus of this paper is to allow students to demonstrate their appreciation and 
awareness of the literary genres and how they work. Candidates should avoid the vague generalities and 
identify specifically how, for example, Briscoe dramatizes his transformation from an inconspicuously 
dressed customer into the potential king stick fighter in his miming. 
The same pattern of focus on the literary qualities of the genre is reflected in the questions on the Poetry 
and Prose passages. Unfortunately and disappointingly, even when candidates identified similes they 
were not able to comment competently on their effectiveness. Often, they gave general or vague 
commentary on outstanding similes. A few exercises in close reading of texts and focused response to the 
writer‘s intention and effect would be excellent preparation for the required skills. In the prose passage, 
several candidates were reluctant to recognize the speaker‘s flawed perspective and this led to fatal 
misinterpretations of this 
humorous passage. Candidates and teachers are again encouraged to approach Paper 01 with a 
determination to confidently apply the skills they honed in the study of the set texts in the genres to 
unseen passages. 
General Comments on Student Performance in Paper 02 
- 5 -
Once again it was evident that candidates need to be trained in the skills of structuring a comparative 
essay. They need to be instructed on how to read a question carefully, paying attention to each section, 
and, where applicable, noting the proportion of marks being awarded. While they are expected to use the 
sections in the questions as a guide to structuring their essays, candidates should not present their 
response in segments—and certainly not with each segment on a separate page. Vocabulary building is 
necessary; students need not merely to be able to identify an example of a character‘s typical behavior or 
an example of mood shift, but should be able to name the character trait or mood that is being illustrated. 
Names of people and places should be correctly spelt, and problem spellings should be anticipated and 
prepared for. Teachers are urged to anticipate and deal with key words that may be needed by the 
student. Fascinating spellings turned up for words such as Caucasian, prejudice, Ku Klux Klan, sarcasm, 
allusion, supremacy, crucifixion, scorpion—all words that must have been used in class discussions. 
It was evident that many candidates were better prepared this year to deal with poetic devices. Three 
steps are necessary: naming the device; quoting or otherwise clearly identifying the device; and, thirdly, 
saying what effect that particular device produces in relation to the overall intention of the poem. 
For the Drama section, it is important for candidates not only to know in detail what takes place in any 
particular scene, but to be able to connect that scene with the entire play in terms of plot, theme, 
character revelation, mood, conflict, and so on. Candidates should understand the symbolic nature of 
stage props, and be able to relate those visual symbols to the themes of the play. 
New Time Limit
With the 2009-2011 syllabus, the time allowed for Paper 2 will be reduced to 2 hours. In view of this, 
teachers may need to work with students on time management so that all three questions will receive 
adequate attention.
Section A – Drama 
Questions 1 - 4
Some candidates again attempted questions on both of the plays; however, only one question may be 
selected from this section. Candidates should be aware of the sequencing of events, and should be able to 
discuss the relationship of a particular scene to the total effect of the play. It is not sufficient for 
candidates merely to recount the events or describe character; they should be able to comment on
dramatic techniques such as contrast, irony, foreshadowing, suspense, etc., and, in modern plays, on the 
stage setting, use of lighting, music, costumes, and so on. 
MACBETH
Question 1
This question focused on the conflict within Macbeth‘s mind as he contemplates the act of regicide, on 
the ways in which Shakespeare evokes our sympathy as we watch this struggle, and on the play‘s 
insistence that killing the King is a most reprehensible act. Quite a number of candidates misinterpreted 
part (a) of the question, which asked for a description of Macbeth‘s conflicting thoughts and feelings as 
he ―contemplates the murder‖ of Duncan. They read this as ―looks at the scene of the murder‖. In part 
(b), candidates were asked to write about how Shakespeare evokes sympathy for Macbeth, and in part 
(c), to explain how 
Shakespeare makes it very clear that regicide is a most horrible crime. All three sections were fairly well 
done, but candidates need to be aware of the time sequence referred to. Time markers like “In the period 
leading up to Duncan’s murder”, “during this period” and “later” were sometimes ignored by 
candidates, with unfortunate consequences. 
Question 2
- 6 -
This was the more popular of the two Macbeth questions. Many candidates referred to movie versions of 
the play rather than to the text itself. As in question 1, many candidates were not alert to time markers: 
―as she prays‖, “in the hours that follow” and “at this stage”. Those who failed to observe the time 
frame required by the question tended to ramble through the play, producing evidence randomly. Section 
(a) tended to be poorly done, chiefly because candidates responded too briefly to gain the 9 marks 
available, but sections (b) and (c) were dealt with more competently. 
THE GLASS MENAGERIE
Question 3
 
This question focused on Amanda‘s destructive parenting methods. Some candidates seemed not to have 
realized that Amanda, though perhaps well meaning, causes psychological damage to her children—
particularly to Laura. While some candidates handled the dynamics of this domestic tragedy fairly well, 
many floundered and were unable to relate to the tensions underlying the action. 
Perhaps because the very concept of ―destructive behaviour‖ was unclear to many candidates, they were 
also unable to discuss the connection between the setting/the music and the impact on her children of 
Amanda‘s conversation and behaviour.
Question 4
This question proved challenging for many candidates. While candidates were able to list Tom‘s leisure 
time activities, some were unable to move from there to comment on what we can learn about him from 
his choice of activities. Section (b), too, proved difficult, with candidates failing to adequately justify 
their claim that Tom either was, or was not, selfish. Most importantly, though, candidates were generally 
unable to properly discuss Tom‘s function in the play as narrator—and consequently as the one who most 
wins our sympathy and whose point of view influences the opinion of the audience. Nor were most 
candidates able to show that Tom‘s actions drive the plot to its climax.
Section B – Poetry
Questions 5 – 6
General Comments 
It was evident from a large number of scripts that teachers have been paying more attention to poetic 
devices, and have been showing students how to discuss their effectiveness. There were still many cases 
of candidates being able to name a device but not identify an example correctly, or, alternatively, to name 
the device and identify an example, but then to be unable to proceed to discuss the effectiveness of that 
device. In most cases, any such discussion was very brief, and this led to poor marks when up to 4 marks 
were allotted for identification and discussion of one device. 
As in previous years, many candidates, when asked for their opinion, offered material extraneous to the 
poem instead of searching the poem itself for supporting evidence.
Many candidates were unable to identify the speaker in the poem, merely identifying him as ―the 
persona‖ instead of as ―a schoolboy who experiences racial prejudice in the classroom‖ or, in the other 
example, as ―an adult who is talking to his/her son about the hypocrisy rampant in society‖. Further, few 
candidates were able to comment on the effectiveness of the choice of speaker. 
The classroom experience of a poem should include discussion of point of view, tone, allusion, imagery, 
irony, contrast, the appropriateness of the title, the effectiveness of the choice of speaker and other such 
devices. 
- 7 -
It was encouraging to note that candidates generally were very familiar with the poems they chose to 
write about, and that they had done research into the historical moment in which the poem was produced. 
Another pleasing observation is that candidates responded with strong emotions to injustices presented in 
the poems. This enthusiasm is commendable, but it needs to be channeled into disciplined discussion of 
poetic devices that evoked such strong emotions. 
Question 5
Some of the scripts responding to this question were outstanding, but generally it was not well done. 
Quite a number of candidates wrote about poems other than the two identified in the question. Generally 
candidates did well on Section (a), describing the kind of prejudice (race/class) in the poems, and were 
able to find examples of that prejudice at work. Section (b) required identification and discussion of two 
poetic devices in each poem. This section was tackled less confidently than Section (a) that required only 
recall and not analysis. It was extremely pleasing, though, to note that quite a few scripts dealt very 
sensitively with the use of allusion in the two poems—to fairy tale and folklore in the one, and to the 
Crucifixion in the other. Section (c) asked the candidate to compare the two poems, showing (with 
reasons) which was more disturbing. In a question of this sort, candidates should comment on the 
disturbing features of EACH poem and then conclude with a decision on which is MORE disturbing. 
Candidates who only dealt with one poem at this point lost a few marks. More important, though, is that 
many candidates relied too heavily on material extraneous to the poem as reasons for their choice. 
Candidates need to understand that in a literature examination, most supporting evidence for statements 
made must come from the work under consideration. 
Question 6
Candidates were generally able to identify the speaker in the poems (though some persisted in referring 
vaguely to ―the persona‖), but only the better candidates were able to say why the choice of speaker was 
effective. Section (b) was fairly well done, with candidates competently identifying aspects of society 
with which the speakers were not happy, and somewhat less competently identifying aspects of 
themselves with which the speakers were not happy. Section (c) was where most candidates did not earn
marks. Having correctly identified and illustrated a poetic device, they were most often unable to say 
very much about how that particular device contributed to the overall impact of the poem. The intense 
emotional identification of candidates with the two speakers‘ concerns (racism and hypocrisy in society) 
was very pleasing. 
- 8 -
Section C – Prose Fiction 
Questions 7 - 12
General comments
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. 
Texts from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. 
Many candidates wrote on the ―novels‖ Macbeth and The Glass Menagerie! 
Quite a number of candidates lost marks for writing on two West Indian novels or on two non-West 
Indian novels. The questions clearly indicate that one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel should 
be used. 
Story-telling was once again the main weakness in responses to questions in this Profile of the paper. 
Candidates should focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story. Generally 
speaking, candidates managed to deal with the part of the question that required recall, but fell down on 
the part that required analysis. 
The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is 
used explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring 
out points of similarity and difference. 
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalized, candidates need to be guided by teachers on 
how to structure their essays. Many candidates also need guidance on correct paragraphing. 
Candidates should be encouraged to study all four of the novels on the syllabus so that they will have a 
greater choice among the questions in this section. Next year, when the time for the exam is reduced to 2 
hours, candidates may well need help in planning their essays in such a way that they focus on the 
requirements of the question instead of resorting to story-telling. Proper names should be correctly spelt, 
and titles of novels should be underlined. 
Generally candidates managed better with the novels Green Days by the River and The Pearl than they 
did with Crick Crack Monkey and A Separate Peace. This last novel proved particularly challenging for 
most candidates. 
Question 7
 
This question invited candidates to consider conflict experienced by a major character in each of two 
novels and to comment on one issue that the writer wants readers to understand from that conflict. While 
candidates were fairly confident while writing about the conflict, they were less sure of themselves when 
moving from that recall activity to discussing the themes of the novels they had selected. 
Question 8
For this question the candidate needed to compare and contrast the situation in which a major character is 
affected by the power of a person, group or society. Responses that used A Separate Peace were 
particularly disappointing, with candidates making little use of the fact that the boys‘ lives are so 
devastatingly affected by the war. Responses using the other three texts were fairly well done. 
- 9 -
Question 9
This question asked candidates to examine the assertion that painful experiences in life help people to 
understand themselves and others better. Most candidates were able to identify painful experiences 
undergone by a major character in each text. Showing just what had or had not been learnt from those 
experiences proved rather more difficult. Better responses managed to weave together painful experience 
and lessons learned from that experience. 
Question 10
In this question candidates were asked to choose novels in which the main character suffers loss. The 
responses here showed a serious absence of structure, with candidates listing every single ―loss‖ 
experienced by the main character instead of selecting the two or three main examples in order to 
produce a focused essay. It was encouraging to see that some candidates, writing on The Pearl, were able 
to move beyond the obvious loss of Coyotito and of the pearl itself and to explain how Kino had lost out 
in terms of his relationship with Juana and his personal morality. Candidates who opted to use Crick 
Crack Monkey and A Separate Peace tended to have difficulty identifying the ―loss‖ experienced by the 
main character, though quite a number of candidates responded very sensitively to the loss of identity 
suffered by Tee as she tries to adjust to life with Aunt Beatrice. 
General 
Overall performance in 2008 was somewhat less impressive than in 2007. Paper 2, in particular, was 
handled better than Paper 1. It was evident that candidates who had been well prepared for the poetry 
questions on Paper 2 did exceptionally well, but that there were many candidates who seemed not to have 
been prepared at all for this Profile; indeed, those candidates who attempted only two questions rather 
than three almost always omitted the poetry question. There was less story telling in the Prose section, 
but many candidates lacked the skills to read the question carefully and interpret its requirements. For the 
Drama question, 
teachers need to deal with specifically genre-related devices (stage setting, conflict, stage directions, 
etc.), but they should also alert candidates to the time frame of events in the play: instructions limiting 
the response to a specific time period were often ignored. 
- 10 -
APPENDIX – 1 
Question # Text No of
Responses
Mean mark on
question
Drama
1 Macbeth
23 Glass Menagerie
4
Poetry
5 World of Poetry
6
Prose 
Fiction
* 789
10
*Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for 
comparison from the following: 
West Indian
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge 
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony 
Non West Indian 
A Separate Peace John Knowles 
The Pearl John Steinbeck 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2009 Caribbean Examinations Council ® 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved 
- 2 - 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2009 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The CSEC examination in English B consists of two papers. 
Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions one from each mode of writing – Drama, Poetry and 
Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‟ 
assessment. In each question candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. 
Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per 
cent to the whole examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions which are arranged under three sections 
which correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer
one question from each section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type A questions, two on each text. These questions require 
knowledge and study of one text. Candidates must answer one question. 
Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison that require 
knowledge and study of two texts. Candidates must answer one question. 
Section C, Prose Fiction, consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study West 
Indian novels as well as other novels in English from the prescribed list. Candidates must answer 
one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to 
the whole examination. 
Paper 01 – Short Answer Questions 
The disappointing results of this year‟s performance in Paper 01 reveal quite clearly that most 
candidates and their teachers are still under the mistaken belief that this paper is a comprehension 
exercise. It is not. This paper requires candidates to apply the core skills they develop in studying 
the writer‟s craft through their focus on the set texts. They are to demonstrate how well they can 
apply these skills to the unseen drama extract, poem and prose extract. 
The genre-based focus of the syllabus and examination since 2006 should have signaled a major shift 
in teaching and learning of literary appreciation. Instead of a focus on the content of the texts and 
the themes explored, teaching and learning in English B should now focus on how the artist 
(dramatist, poet and prose writer) shapes his/her work to affect the minds and hearts of the readers or 
audience. Previous schools‟ reports have emphasized that the questions will remain essentially the 
same, but the unseen passages will change. The syllabus outlines that the objectives are meant to 
cover the techniques the artist uses to manipulate how the reader will most likely think and feel about 
what the artist produces. Teachers who faithfully follow the philosophy and intent of the syllabus 
- 3 - 
will produce students who are critical thinkers, who will be able to read between the lines and see 
strategies of persuasion at work and so become less gullible and less easily manipulated. 
Performance in Paper 01 indicates that greater emphasis needs to be placed on preparation for 
responding appropriately to the questions on the paper. 
The mean mark out of 15 for Drama (7.04), Poetry (4.9) and Prose Fiction (8.43) charted a slight 
improvement in Drama and Prose Fiction from last year, but performance in Poetry fell below last 
year‟s. Teachers are urged to adopt a developmental approach in preparing candidates for success in 
this examination, and especially for this paper, where what is required is the application of skills they 
are expected to have honed in the study of their set text. 
Paper 02 – Extended Essay Questions 
The 2009 examination was the first testing of the new cycle of texts in the 2009-11 syllabus. 
Following on from requests from teachers‟ associations and teachers all questions in Section C, the 
prose section, could be answered using any of the four texts. (It should be noted that this represents a 
significant difference from the 2012-14 examination, in which all questions will be text specific). 
The 2009 examination also introduced a new approach to Question 6, the second of the poetry 
questions. This was a general question that allowed candidates to choose the poems they wished to 
discuss, based on a specified rubric or theme. The aim of this question was to allow greater latitude 
for candidates to show their knowledge of a wide range of poems on the syllabus. 
Candidates seemed to have approached the examination with enthusiasm and a high level of reader 
response, often showing passionate engagement with the characters and issues discussed, especially 
in poetry and drama. Most candidates knew the texts well. However, as in former years, some used 
drama and poetry texts to answer prose questions (Section C); in Section A, some relied on film 
versions of The Merchant of Venice instead of the text; and in Section B, some displayed inadequate 
knowledge of the poems. Some candidates appeared to have been well taught and put to good use the 
socio-historical contexts of the texts, including poems. Some, however, appeared to lack this 
knowledge even where it was necessary. 
Overall, most candidates performed well on the parts of questions requiring knowledge of the texts. 
The analytical aspects of the questions, that is, those that required candidates to show knowledge of 
the writer‟s craft, allowed well-prepared candidates to display their skills and elicited some excellent 
essays. However, these aspects continued to pose a major challenge for less well prepared 
candidates. Candidates showed familiarity with the vocabulary of literature, but many were unable to 
do much more than mention the names of devices. The problem was particularly apparent in their 
response to the poetry questions. It appeared least in the responses to the prose questions, but for a 
negative reason: too many candidates seemed unaware that prose writers also use devices, and 
tended to respond to prose with reference only to events. The better prepared candidates included 
discussion of literary features and devices such as setting, contrast, irony and symbols in their 
responses. Many candidates were unaware that phrases such as „how the writer shows…‟ require 
some attention to literary devices, and that words such as „discuss‟ and „comment on‟ call for 
analysis, not narration. Even so, there was a pleasing improvement in the attempts to focus on the 
demands of the questions rather than simply narrate. 
- 4 - 
With regard to language and organization, most candidates wrote in essay format and paragraph 
organization and use of English were generally satisfactory. Many who wrote in essay format 
attempted introductions and conclusions, and there was improvement in the attempt to make 
comparisons between the texts in particular questions. Some candidates produced excellent 
introductions that utilized all the key terms in the various sections of the questions. The better 
candidates also made transitions between paragraphs, using appropriate words, sentences and phrases 
such as „however‟, „in contrast‟, „both‟, „in the same way‟ to link the thoughts from one paragraph to
the next. 
However, some problems persist. In answering the structured questions, many candidates continue to 
write in itemized sections instead of essay format. Some even wrote each part of the question on a 
different page or separated by spaces from the preceding part. In some cases, all or most of the 
candidates from particular schools wrote in this way. Many who wrote in this format produced 
confused, repetitive responses because they did not conceptualize the essay as a whole. Material used 
in answer to one section was repeated in subsequent sections, as candidates seem to have read and 
answered one segment of the question, then gone on to read and answer the next segment, as in a 
short answer response. Students need to be taught to write in essay format, regardless of whether the 
question is structured or not. Instruction should also be provided on how to organize responses to 
non-structured questions, such as those in Section C. Candidates also need to be taught to 
conceptualize the question as a whole, and to frame their introductions with both texts in mind, in the 
case of questions requiring a response to two texts. 
Students should be reminded to underline the titles of novels and plays, to place the titles of poems in 
quotation marks, and to use capital letters to begin all the words in titles, except for function words. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short-Answer Questions 
Drama
Candidates experienced few problems in dealing with comprehension-type parts of the questions 
such as Part (b) which asked candidates to identify two stage props and Part (e) where they were 
asked to identify two different feelings the extract evokes in the audience. However, where 
candidates lost marks were in the parts of the questions which required that they show how the writer 
manipulated the dramatic techniques to achieve his purpose. For example, Part (b) also asked the 
candidates to state the importance of each stage direction identified. Part (c), which asked candidates 
to state two dramatic functions of the customers and the crowd, was poorly done. Teachers need to 
focus more on the elements of the genre and how the writer uses these elements to create meaning. 
Poetry
This question was badly done as the mean indicates. Of the 19,247 candidates who answered it 279 
or 1.5 per cent scored zero and only six candidates scored full marks. Part (a), which was worth one 
mark and merely asked the candidate to identify who “they” referred to, was not well done. Part (d) 
which asked candidates to identify the mood in specified lines also was not well done. These are 
questions which required comprehension of the poem. It was obvious from the responses to these 
questions that many of the candidates did not understand the meaning created in the poem. Hence, 
the poor performance in the other parts of the questions which required analysis of different aspects 
of the poetic techniques used by the writer to create meaning. 
- 5 - 
Prose
While candidates performed better on this question than on the poetry question, performance was not 
as good as expected. Candidates were able to answer quite well Parts (a), (b) (i), and (e). However, 
Parts (b) (ii), (c) and (d) proved to be challenging to many candidates. 
Paper 02 – Extended Essay Questions 
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on page 23 of the syllabus. 
Drama
Questions 1 and 2: William Shakespeare‟s The Merchant of Venice
As expected, most responses (a total of 71 per cent) in the drama section were on Questions 1 and 2 
combined. However, Question 1 was by far the more popular, accounting for approximately 63
percent of total responses in the drama section. Question 2 accounted for a little over 8 per cent. 
Most candidates performed well on Question 1. 
Question 1 
The overwhelming popularity of Question 1 can be attributed to the fact that it focused on the 
courtroom scene, the dramatic final showdown in the play. The problem of being carried away by 
film versions rather than focusing on the text was particularly apparent with this question. Both 
questions elicited high levels of reader response as candidates took sides with „the underdog‟ along 
both racial/ethnic (Shylock) and gender lines (Portia) or took sides on more „universal‟ moral lines, 
arguing that Shylock was immoral to want to commit murder, or that Portia was guilty of dishonesty, 
regardless of whether or not it was for a good cause. Many candidates had been taught the historical 
contexts of the play as well as the rules of argumentation and put these to good use in framing their 
arguments. However, as many candidates argued one-sidedly, ignoring factors such as the treatment 
meted out to Shylock and Jews generally, seeing the Venetians as all good, and Shylock as all bad. 
This seemed attributable as much to poor textual analysis as to lack of knowledge of the historical 
context. For example, Antonio‟s treatment of Shylock was often ignored.
 
Candidates scored well on Part (a), which required an outline of the legal issues being addressed in 
the courtroom. 
The least well-handled part of the question was Part (b) which required candidates to explain the 
punishment and mercy that Shylock received. Many candidates had no idea how to structure their 
response to this part. Instead of pointing out which parts of their responses had to do with 
punishment and which to do with mercy, candidates often merely listed the things done to Shylock, 
with no attempt to develop the points. Part (c), which required candidates to discuss ironic aspects of 
the scene, elicited some very interesting and acute discussions, and some candidates focused on 
dramatic irony. This part proved challenging for weaker candidates as they were either not familiar 
with „irony‟ or were unable to explain it properly. Some who were familiar with the device did not 
present both sides of the situation they considered ironic. Instead of fully outlined situations of irony, 
candidates gave hints through one-sided statements. 
 
- 6 - 
Question 2 
This question addressed the issue of morality in the play. This was not as well done as Question 1. 
Some candidates either did not understand what is meant by „moral‟ or ignored it completely. Part 
(a), which required candidates to discuss two moral lessons learnt by specified characters, sometimes 
elicited unfocused plot summaries involving these characters as candidates sought to display their 
knowledge of the play rather than to respond to the question. Part (c) required candidates to discuss 
how Shakespeare showed that Portia had moral weaknesses. Candidates interpreted this to mean any 
form of „weakness.‟ Some, especially those unfamiliar with the historical context, spoke about 
Portia‟s „foolish‟ obedience to her dead father. 
Questions 3 and 4: August Wilson‟s Fences
Approximately 8 per cent of the candidates attempted Question 3 and approximately 19 per cent
attempted Question 4. Most candidates had a sound knowledge of the text and performed well on 
both questions. Candidates identified with the characters in the text and seemed to have enjoyed 
writing their responses. Better prepared candidates addressed dramatic devices and strategies used by 
the playwright as required in Parts (a) and (b) of Question 3 and Part (c) of Question 4. 
Question 3 
Question 3 required candidates to outline the final scene of the play and to show how the playwright 
heightened the audience‟s feelings of sadness and regret while suggesting feelings of compassion 
and hope among Troy‟s family members. Candidates who did not know the play well introduced 
details outside of the scene and gave vague outlines of the scene itself. 
Question 4 required candidates to discuss how Wilson presents Troy‟s performance as a parent, 
comparing his performance with his father‟s as well as with Cory‟s assessment of him. Candidates 
were able to perform well on this question as the same information used in Part (a) could be used to 
answer Parts (b) and (c) with different commentary. Weaker candidates gave repetitive or story￾telling answers as they re-presented details without commentary directed at the specific parts of the 
question. 
Poetry 
Questions 5 and 6 
Approximately two-thirds (67 per cent) of the candidates who attempted Section B answered 
Question 5. This question required candidates to respond comparatively to two poems about death: 
„To an Athlete Dying Young‟ and „The Lynching.‟ However, the fact that one-third of candidates 
attempted the general question, Question 6, indicates that while the majority of candidates preferred 
the structured question, the new format for Question 6 has significant appeal. 
- 7 - 
Candidates produced some excellent responses to both questions, and many candidates obtained 
satisfactory scores. Surprisingly and pleasingly, many candidates obtained their best scores on these 
questions. However, too many scored most of their marks on the recall and interpretation aspects. 
The most important skill being tested is the ability to show how poetic devices are used to highlight 
themes and achieve particular effects. Most candidates seemed to have been exposed to the 
discussion of poetic devices and could name devices used. However, discussion of how the devices 
actually worked, and how they were linked to the overall meaning or theme being discussed, was 
often vague, rambling and confused. Some candidates gave the names of devices but could identify 
no example of the device in the poem. Most candidates who referred to puns and oxymoron had no 
idea what these terms meant. The difference in meaning among crucially important terms such
„poet‟, „persona/speaker‟ and „character‟ were often not known. Candidates confused the speaker 
with the poet, or identified a character in the poem as the speaker. The latter problem arose 
frequently with regard to „God‟s Work‟, a popular poem in answering Question 6. Mr Edwards was 
often identified as the speaker, possibly because he spoke a line of narrative in the poem. Often 
candidates did not know the poems well, and concocted their own versions of what the poems were 
about. Many candidates did not link the discussion of devices to the rest of the question. 
Question 5 
In answering Question 5, many candidates confused Dennis Scott‟s „Epitaph‟ with „The Lynching‟, 
and far too many candidates wrote without any apparent awareness of the historical context in which 
lynching took place. As a result, many held the erroneous idea that the lynched man was a slave, and 
some wrote without reference to the racial issue involved. Some candidates who did not know the 
poem well wrote that the crowd was both black and white. The poems, like the novels and plays, are 
set texts; thus, wherever necessary, the historical context should be taught. 
Question 6 
Question 6 required candidates to compare two poems that deal with the issue of power. The 
question had the advantage of being able to be answered with reference to almost all the poems on 
the syllabus. Although the question was less well handled than Question 5, candidates produced 
some fascinating, original and creative discussions and insights into the nature of power. Popular 
choices in answering the question were „Richard Cory‟, „God‟s Work‟, „God‟s Grandeur‟, „Colonial 
Girls‟ School‟, „Sonnets from China‟, „The Emigrants‟ and „This is the Dark Time, My Love.‟ 
„Sonnets from China‟ was often misread, but pleasingly, some candidates showed knowledge of the 
sonnet form and were able to comment on the relation between its structure and the poem‟s meaning. 
The same types of problems that arose for Question 5 also arose for Question 6. Many candidates 
compared the devices instead of showing how the devices highlighted the issue of power. Many did 
not know the historical context of „This Is the Dark Time, My Love‟ and wrote that the poet was 
depicting war in Guyana. 
One recurrent problem was the use of „invented‟ quotations. Candidates should be encouraged to 
give good paraphrases if they cannot remember the exact quotations. 
- 8 - 
Prose Fiction
Question 7 
This question, which asked candidates to discuss the writers‟ presentation of ways in which the 
traditions and values upheld by society may or may not be in conflict with an individual‟s potential, 
was attempted by 19 per cent of candidates who attempted Section C. Candidates addressed the term 
„traditions‟ in pleasingly diverse ways, including „folklore‟, „customs and practices‟, and „communal 
beliefs.‟ Some candidates addressed only traditions, while others addressed only values, but overall 
the question was well done. This question again highlighted the need for candidates to be taught the 
historical context of set texts. The absence of this type of knowledge was especially apparent in the 
case of Beka Lamb. Many candidates attempting to use the political situation in Belize as part of 
their argument had difficulty as they were completely unfamiliar with the historical situation. As 
with the other prose questions, weaker, less well prepared candidates engaged in story telling instead 
of organizing their responses around comment statements related directly to the question. 
Question 8 
This was the least popular of the prose questions, eliciting under 8 per cent of the responses. The 
question required candidates to discuss how writers use the natural environment to represent 
concepts or feelings. Its lack of popularity could be attributable either to candidates not knowing 
what is meant by „natural environment‟ or to the fact that they have not been taught the symbolism of 
nature as setting. Nature as an aspect of setting plays an important part in all four novels, especially 
The Hummingbird Tree and A Kestrel for a Knave. Setting, in all its aspects (natural, social, 
geographical), is an important aspect of the study of prose fiction. Candidates should be prepared for 
questions on this feature. Overall, candidates did not do well on this question. 
Question 9 
This question required candidates to discuss how being different from others affected a major 
character in two novels, and to comment on one strategy used by each writer in presenting this 
difference. Approximately 24 per cent of the candidates who attempted the Prose Section chose this 
question. Many ignored the part of the question that required analysis of the writer‟s strategy. Some 
candidates used drama or poetry texts and so could not score any marks. 
Question 10 
This question, which asked candidates to discuss the influence of family relationships on the 
development of major characters, was by far the most popular of the prose questions. It was 
attempted by approximately 51 per cent of the candidates. The question elicited some very good
responses, but about 40 per cent of the candidates engaged in storytelling instead of directing their 
responses to the specific question. While all the texts were appropriate, candidates often did not 
choose appropriate characters for analysis, or were unable to present arguments even where the 
character was appropriate. This was particularly evident with regard to all the major female 
characters (Jaillin, Sophie, Toycie) except Beka. Candidates may have studied the texts with an 
overarching focus on protagonists, neglecting the other significant characters. 
- 9 - 
Conclusions 
Candidates seem to have become more comfortable with the genre-specific direction of the syllabus. 
More teachers appear to be teaching poetry successfully in a serious way, and more attention appears 
to be paid to the skills of language use and organization. However, more needs to be done to help 
students explain HOW devices work to achieve their effects, and to use specific, concrete language 
(sight, sound, taste, etc) when discussing images and effects. Students need to be given adequate 
exercises in identifying and explaining puns, oxymorons, irony, and distinguishing between the 
speaker‟s voice and the voice of characters in narrative poems. More attention needs to be given to 
the writers‟ craft in prose fiction, and students should be guided to discuss not only main characters 
(protagonists) but other major characters as well. Skills in organizing essays need to be strengthened. 
Students need to write introductions and conclusions that focus on the question and help to minimize 
„mere narration.‟ In writing the body of the essay, they should be trained to use opening and closing 
sentences that keep the essay focused on the question asked. 
Recommendations to Teachers 
Give students practice in answering examination-type questions that are structured and 
„unstructured.‟ Guiding students to see structured questions as a whole, will help eliminate 
repetitions. „Unstructured questions‟ also have an inbuilt structure or logic of sequence that 
students can be guided to identify for themselves. 
Teach students the historical contexts of the set texts. Lack of knowledge of this context is 
especially a problem with regard to Shakespeare, Beka Lamb and the poems highlighted in the 
previous section of the report. 
With reference to The Merchant of Venice: students should know that Jews in Europe were the 
victims of unequal laws: for example, confined to areas referred to as ghettos; forced to wear 
distinctive symbols that identified them as „other‟; disallowed from owning real estate (Shylock‟s 
property would not have included land) and in most cases permitted only one form of occupation: 
usury. They should be aware that Shylock was the 16th century equivalent of our modern day 
banker and that the Rialto, where Antonio and the other merchants also gathered, was a financial 
centre. Students should be guided to recognize that both Antonio and Shylock were merchants, 
except that one sold money and the other sold goods, both for profit. Even though external 
research material is available, students can be guided to pay attention to the evidence of the facts 
above within the play itself. 
The gender-specific ironies in the play can be brought out by reference to the fact that in 
Shakespeare‟s day women were treated as „second class‟ and would not have had professions as 
lawyers, and that on the Shakespearean stage Portia‟s role would have been played by a boy 
actor. 
Dramatic irony should be given specific attention as a form of irony associated with the genre. 
Re the poems: Provide information on the history of lynching as a phenomenon of post-slavery 
America. Explain that lynching is an illegal act (a particular form of murder), so the term could 
not have been applied to a slave master killing his own slave since slaves were considered chattel 
(legal property), not humans. 
- 10 - 
Provide information on the context to which „This is the Dark Time‟ speaks- colonial Britain‟s 
attempt to stop the independence movement in Guyana in 1953, by suspending the constitution, 
declaring a state of emergency and bringing in soldiers to maintain control. Emphasize that no 
„war‟ took place.
While students at this level should not be „bogged down‟ with excessive contextual information, 
some brief knowledge about the poets might help their class discussions –for example, they 
might find it helpful to know that Caribbean-born poet James Berry has lived in the USA and 
resides in Britain and that Olive Senior is a Caribbean poet who, like Berry, grew up in the 
colonial period; that „Dreaming Black Boy‟ and „Colonial Girls School‟ reflect experiences in 
their different locations. Students could be encouraged to do their own internet and library searches.
Guide students to understand the following concepts: speaker, poet, character and narrator. 
Encourage students to use literary vocabulary in writing essays on prose, not just on poetry or 
drama. Teach texts from several angles: characterization; setting; symbols; themes. 
Make use of good student-centred texts available on the teaching of the syllabus, such as Carlong 
English B for CXC (Text with DVD). Keith Noel, Sheila Garcia-Bisnott and Carol Hunter￾Clarke. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2010 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2010 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing —
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section A
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section B
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Section C
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
The 2010 examination was the second testing of the new cycle of texts. There was a noticeable increase in 
appreciation, application and overall results in both Papers 01 and 02.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
-3- 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
There was a dramatic improvement in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. 
The mean scores for Paper 01 for the period 2008–2010 in the table below show the improvement in performance. 
Mean Scores for the Period 2008–2010 
Paper 01 2008 2009 2010
DRAMA 6.18 7.02 11.00
POETRY 5.54 4.9 10.49
PROSE 5.03 8.43 7.47
Candidates demonstrated an excellent grasp of the principles of literary appreciation and added their personal and 
heartfelt responses to the excerpts/texts in the three genres. Even with the Prose Profile, where the mean mark 
recorded a disappointing 7.47, most candidates displayed their imaginative flair and creative interpretations, 
although these were ponderously misapplied to the comic passage which required light treatment. 
The personal involvement from candidates was evident in their responses. It is clear that teachers have taken the 
advice from previous reports and the sensitization sessions on the revised syllabus and added new life to the study 
of Literature. 
Question 1
For Question 1, Drama, most candidates earned one of the two marks for Part (a). Although they were able to 
identify the marriage as the main concern of the scene, and which gave them 1 mark, many candidates did not 
mention the tension or disagreement among the women. This question required candidates to form a total picture 
of not just the event but also the conflict of the scene.
However, for Part (b), which assessed candidates understanding of the use of stage directions, the majority of 
candidates were able to earn full marks. Candidates were able to competently demonstrate what the stage 
directions revealed about the characters feelings and provided the relevant supporting evidence to earn full marks. 
The majority of candidates earned the total score for Parts (c), (d) and (e). Part (c) required candidates to quote a 
line which showed tension in the scene and to explain the tension. Part (d) was a question on characterization 
which focused on Mama. Candidates had to support their answer with one speech and one stage direction. This 
question was mastered. 
Part (e) was another characterization question which focused on the character, Jenny. Again, candidates handled 
the question quite competently. 
-4- 
Question 2
For Question 2, Poetry, most candidates were able to earn full marks for Parts (a), (c) and (e), but only a few 
achieved the total score in (b) and (d).
Part (a) asked candidates to identify three aspects of the poem that would appeal to a Caribbean person. 
Candidates were able to competently respond to this question. In Part (c) candidates were asked to identify in 
what way stanza four was different from the first three stanzas. In previous years, candidates had experienced 
difficulty when responding to questions which assessed their ability to recognize difference or contrast. This was 
not the case with this question. For Part (e), candidates were able to identify the images of sound and were able to 
indicate what impressions of the sea were created by the images. 
However, candidates‘ responses to Parts (b) and (d) reinforce the view that figurative devices and their 
effectiveness continue to be challenging to students. Teachers need to find innovative ways of showing students 
how writers use the different figurative devices to create the effect they want in their work.
Question 3
The overall mean for Question 3 indicated that Prose Fiction was not well done. While most candidates were able 
to score full marks in several parts of Questions 1 and 2, most candidates did not score full marks on any of the 
parts of Question 3. Part (c) proved most challenging. Candidates could not effectively identify and discuss the 
comical element in the passage. Expected responses were exaggeration (the gestures and costumes); contrast as 
for instance, the big, strong woman and the seemingly small, old, frail man; the diction and pantomime. A more 
careful reading of the passage would have assisted candidates in responding to the comic elements of the passage. 
Candidates did not seem to be able to picture this woman who looked like a German warrior. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage as a whole. 
Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful 
processing of the events described. In the case of this year‘s prose passage, the vast majority of candidates were 
unable to discern the comic element that dominated the extract. It appears that candidates conceive Literature as a 
ponderous study of only deep and serious concerns. Teachers need to help students expand that notion to embrace 
the more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in Literature and life. 
While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to offer 
students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students offer to the questions. Too 
often, candidates‘ admissible responses to questions are inaccessible to those who do not share knowledge of their 
dialect. We therefore recommend that teachers give students the feedback on the Standard English translation of 
their correct responses to the questions. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful attempts to 
have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and emotional 
responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students‘ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation 
to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the 
study of Literature is meant to engender. 
-5- 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1
The Shakespeare questions yielded almost two-thirds of the total responses for the drama section. For Question 1, 
candidates demonstrated knowledge of the casket scenes. However, except for Portia‘s response to Bassanio, 
they appeared somewhat vague about Portia‘s response to the other suitors. There was also some amount of 
confusion, about the inscriptions on the caskets. Part (c), (How does Shakespeare show us that the casket scene 
with Bassanio is important to the play as a whole?) was by far the most challenging area of the question. 
Acceptable responses dealt with the dramatic effect such as the tension; the building of suspense; and the contrast 
with the other scenes portraying Morocco and Arragon, by way of its romantic element. Candidates were also 
expected to make the link to the entire plot, that is, by guessing right, Bassanio is now able to marry Portia and as 
a result gets involved in Antonio’s case. Connections could have been made to the ring plot as well. This portion 
of the question aimed to assess candidates‘ understanding of the significance of Bassanio‘s victory to the 
development of the play, thematically, structurally and dramatically. The better prepared candidates produced 
well-developed essays and while no one scored full marks (35), seven candidates were able to score 34. The 
mean for this question was 16.31. 
Question 2
There was a certain element of comfort and ease in terms of responding to the details required in Question 2. 
Candidates were able to describe the money lending scene with Antonio and Shylock, Part (a). However, Part (b) 
which asked for two techniques which make the scene exciting proved to be more challenging. Candidates 
experienced some amount of difficulty in identifying the techniques and further, to link these to how they made 
the scene exciting. By merely relating the scene, candidates generally did not spend enough time discussing or 
showing how language for instance was used (for example, irony, pun) or how argument was used, or even the 
-6- 
presentation of Shylock (his slow, methodical, and deliberate language that aggravates Antonio) and Antonio. Part 
(c), which asked candidates to comment on how the scene brings out one issue or theme in the play might have 
been better handled if candidates had demonstrated understanding of the word issue and theme. Many responses 
simply regurgitated the plot and others did not effectively link the scene to the play as a whole. Candidates who 
mentioned race, religion, prejudice, the bond, values, did not often provide enough textual evidence. 
This question performed slightly better than Question 1. Eight candidates scored full marks. The mean for the 
question was 17.70. 
Fences 
Question 3
Question 3 was fairly well done. Part (a), Troy‘s confession and Rose‘s response to it which was required was 
quite familiar to candidates. On the whole, the candidates handled this part of the question very well, although 
the tendency was to re-tell the plot. For Part (b), even though candidates were asked to discuss three ways in 
which the relationship changed, some responses strayed from the Troy/Rose relationship. The final part of the 
question was well done by most candidates who attempted this question. They often explored wider implications 
with finesse. There were some though, who summarized the plot instead of, for instance, discussing one of the 
symbolic meanings of the fence; that is, keeping family in, which underscores the issue of faithfulness. 
Two candidates scored full marks on this question. This question also had the highest mean for the section. The 
mean for this question was 18.14.
Question 4 
Candidates were able to describe the chosen relationship very well. They were not, however, so effective in 
commenting on one dramatic device used to present the relationship, Part (b). Devices that could have been used 
are as follows: the symbolism of the fence and its ironic function (of keeping in and keeping out, and the self￾destructive nature of the relationship between Troy and Rose); contrast; irony; imagery as in the garden image, 
and the game. Part (c) was handled reasonably well as candidates were able to identify and discuss issues/themes 
such as infidelity, communication and sexuality quite competently. 
No candidates scored full marks on this question. However, one candidate scored 34 and 13 scored 33. The mean 
for this question was 16.54. 
Poetry
Question 5
Candidates‘ performance on this question was fair. The named poems in Question 5 were ―A Contemplation 
Upon Flowers‖ and ―God‘s Grandeur‖. Part (a) asked candidates to explain two lessons learned by the speaker by 
looking at Nature. The better able candidates performed remarkably well on this question. However, the weaker 
candidates deviated quite a bit from the lessons learnt. There was also some amount of confusion with the poems 
specified in the question and others listed in the syllabus. Candidates made reference to poems such as, ―God‘s 
Work‖ confusing it with ―God‘s Grandeur‖, and ―Travelling Through the Dark‖ instead of ―A Contemplation 
Upon Flowers‖. In instances when it appeared that some candidates could not relate the title of the poems to 
Nature which was required for Part (b), they repeated the material used in Part (a). Some candidates missed 
opportunities to discuss the impact of words in the titles and what they evoke, such as contemplation, flowers and 
grandeur. Many failed to make the significant connection to the importance of Nature.
-7- 
Although ―God‘s Grandeur‖ does not mention Nature, it mentions God. Nature is important only because of God; 
it is God‘s glory that is manifested in Nature and renews it. It was heartening to see that some candidates argued 
along this vein. 
Candidates were expected to focus either on diction or devices to answer Part (c). The word illustrate might have 
caused some amount of uncertainty in responses. Generally, there were some verbose explanations about nature 
as a whole, omitting obvious responses such as trans for ―A Contemplation Upon Flowers‖– ―God‘s Grandeur‖ 
personification, rhyme, diction and for similes, comparison, repetition, internal rhyme Too often, responses 
identified the choice of word but without textual support or did not indicate the speaker‘s feeling. 
Eleven candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 15.83. 
Question 6
Question 6 is the general question and candidates are required to choose two suitable poems from the prescribed 
list to answer the question set. Candidates seemed to have a strong preference for this kind of question as it 
yielded almost two-thirds of the responses. The storytelling element resonated well with candidates who sensibly 
and sensitively chose appropriate poems for discussion. Popular choices were ―Coolie Mother‖, ―For my 
Mother‖, and ―Richard Cory‖. Part (a) was well handled as candidates were able to outline the storyline in 
selected poems. It must be noted that candidates were not penalized for choosing lyrical poems such as ―God‘s 
Grandeur‖ as the burden was on the explanation. For example, the response could suggest how the speaker is 
looking around him and thinking about how Nature tells its own story of how humans fail to understand the 
meaning of Nature. 
Responding to why each poet finds it important to tell that particular story, Part (b), candidates demonstrated 
some level of analysis and carved out spaces for personal inputs, but weaker candidates repeated material already 
used in Part (a), returning as it were, to storytelling. Part (c), proved to be the most challenging as candidates 
were asked to discuss one device each poet used to make the story enjoyable. Some candidates indentified 
devices but could not show how these made the poems enjoyable. In some instances, devices were merely 
explained or defined and not applied to the question.
Like Question 5, eleven candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.41. 
Prose Fiction
Question 7
This was a very popular question; approximately, one-third of the candidates attempted it. What some candidates 
missed was the fact that it was not an absolute statement. The question asked for the extent to which the 
statement was true. Superior responses tied the authors‘ technique with the thematic issue and made allowances 
for the view that friendship might not always heal. Common selections were Beka and Toysie and Billy and Kes. 
Thirty-one candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for the question was 18.68 
Question 8
Question 8 required a comparison of the authors‘ portrayal of hope. This was not a popular choice. This may 
have been because in making the comparison explicit, the question asked for more than mere discussion or 
narration. Weaker attempts focused only on hope, with little or no knowledge of tragedy. Again, candidates who 
-8- 
chose Beka Lamb and A Kestrel for a Knave had strong arguments that provided fruitful discussions either via 
characters or writer‘s craft or a combination of both. 
While this question was not popular, many of the candidates who attempted it provided some well-developed and 
superior essays. This question produced the highest mean for the entire examination, that of 19.22. Two 
candidates scored full marks. 
Question 9
This was the least popular question in this section. The question specifically focused on narrative techniques 
(signalled by ―Show how the writer presents …‖). Candidates, for the most part, resorted to storytelling of 
instances of injustice in selected texts. However, superior and good responses focused on the use of contrast as in 
race, class and gender; symbols such as the church, school, the teacher, David’s father; tone as in the satirical 
ways in which fanaticism is explored in The Chrysalids, for instance, and setting in the texts, to indicate instances 
of injustice. 
Questions 8 and 9 had direct reference to writer‘s craft and is may be why they were not popular among 
candidates. 
This mean for Question 9 was 15.00. No candidate scored full marks (35) or even 34. Four candidates achieved a 
score of 33. 
Question 10
Question 10 was one of the more popular choices; approximately one third of the candidates attempted it. The 
question focused on the difficulties faced by a major character in search of personal freedom. Narration was 
popular but stronger responses acknowledged the political context of colonialism in Beka Lamb for instance, and 
its impact on the personal. Those who selected The Hummingbird Tree discussed for instance, the stranglehold of 
class, race and gender. Responses for The Chrysalids discussed David’s struggle to be free from his tyrannical 
and fanatical father. Billy’s entrapment in his social class and dysfunctional home environment and low 
expectations from society, were common responses for those who selected A Kestrel for a Knave. 
Two candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 16.64. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice limits the 
depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer the 
question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this a genre-specific 
examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the analytical 
element in essays. 
-9- 
4. Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen vocabulary, 
grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find opportunities to give small 
writing tasks (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students such as 
 exercises which target introductory paragraphs 
 finding textual evidence to develop one point. 
5. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the movie version, for 
instance). 
6. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area.
7. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, teachers are
encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the language to describe, 
explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening and speaking. 
8. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument of the 
writers‘ style, but is also the ‗lived‘ experience. Literature can help students to explore, question, form 
judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what is 
sometimes captured in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2011
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The historic first January sitting of the English B examination exposed a diverse range of responses from a 
population of candidates that ranged from 11–59 years. Candidates‘ responses suggested that they enjoyed the 
encounter with set texts and responded with the range of organizational thinking styles which they either naturally 
developed or were schooled into.
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two components —
Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing —
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of ten optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section A
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section B
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates must choose two 
appropriate poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer 
one question from this section. 
Section C
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English. These texts are specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
The overall performance in the January 2011 English B examination was quite satisfactory and it is envisaged that 
performance will improve even further as candidates‘ performance on Profile 2 — Poetry — improves. 
-3- 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
Candidates‘ performance in Paper 01 was good. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 29.25; 
in Profile 2, Poetry, 20.29; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 22.98. The weakest performance was in Poetry. 
Candidates demonstrated an excellent grasp of the principles of literary appreciation and added their personal and 
heartfelt responses to the excerpts/texts in the three genres. The personal involvement from candidates was 
evident in their responses which seemed to range from precocious to a mature analysis of the texts and the 
questions. 
Question 1
Overall the question was handled well and quite a few candidates earned full marks. Generally, the more able 
candidates were able to access marks which ranged from 11 to 15 (15 marks being the maximum). Those who did 
not achieve maximum score either misinterpreted the question or did not give full enough responses. Candidates 
are encouraged to read extracts in their entirety instead of focusing on one or two words to base their responses. 
Most of the candidates were able to earn one of the two marks allocated to Part (a). This question assessed 
candidates‘ comprehension of the incident taking place. There was some misinterpretation. Some candidates saw 
the event as a political rally or a protest (making reference to words like ‗minister‘ and ‗commissioner‘). Others 
chose to highlight and interpret the word ‗gay‘ as having homosexual connotations or that there was just a march, 
missing the carnival-like event. 
Part (b), which assessed candidates understanding of the use of dramatic techniques, produced some very good 
responses. However, like Part (a), there was evidence of misinterpretation. For example, Brock‘s statement about 
getting an exorcist or using bullets was taken to mean that he was not in favour of the tramping. Some candidates 
gave only one and not two ways in which the playwright showed that Brock does not share the view of the others. 
Others missed the dramatic technique of the stage device. They indicated, for example, that Brock leaves the 
stage. There were some candidates who merely quoted lines from the extract instead of using the lines to show 
the manifestation. 
Part (c) (i) required candidates to use the words ‗how undignified‘ to show what they revealed about Stickwell‘s 
attitude. This part of the question was not well done. Some candidates responded to the behaviour of Stickwell to 
the marchers instead of using Stickwell‘s words to evaluate or assess his attitude to the festivity of the marchers. 
Others tried to define the word ‗undignified‘. The better prepared candidates were awarded full marks for 
accurately indicating that Stickwell was being condescending, snobbish and was generally disgusted by the 
-4- 
actions of the Tramping Man and his supporters. The second part of this question, (c) (ii), was reasonably well 
done, although there was evidence of misinterpretation, possibly because candidates did not understand the word 
‗imply‘. The expected response for this question required candidates to capture the fact that Stickwell did not trust 
Brock and that he was not surprised by his action. There was some confusion in the assumption candidates made 
that he was making reference to the Minister, when he was actually speaking about Brock. Some candidates 
made statements like, ‗He told the Minister not to go to the dance, but he would not listen.‘ In a few instances, 
candidates felt that Brock was the same person as the minister. 
Part (d) (i) required candidates to state one difference between the government officials and the Tramping Man 
and his supporters. Generally, responses should have suggested that the government officials seemed stiff and 
unmoved by the music, whereas the Tramping Man and his supporters seemed alive and energetic. One of the 
major areas of misinterpretation for Part (d) (i) was that instead of showing the difference between the 
government officials and the Tramping Man, candidates looked at differences among the government officials and 
their positions. Part (d) (ii) required candidates to show how the playwright emphasizes the difference identified 
in Part (d) (i). Expected responses should have mentioned the dynamics between the on-stage versus off-stage 
activities (the stiff irrational abuse by officialdom versus the offstage energized, joyous, natural movement led or 
influenced by the Tramping Man). Many candidates repeated material mentioned in Part (d) (i) instead of looking 
at the importance of saying how or looking at the playwright‘s method (technique) of differentiating between both 
groups and were therefore unable to access the marks awarded for this question. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item. The onus was on the candidates to take a position then provide textual 
evidence to support the position taken. Many candidates scored full marks as they were able to support their 
claim. However, some candidates did not understand the meaning of the word ‗justified‘ and proceeded to 
contradict themselves. For example, they said the reasons for the arrest were justified yet they showed why it was 
not right for the Tramping Man to be arrested. Others restated lines to support the position taken. 
Question 2
For Question 2, Poetry, candidates seemed to identify with the issue of aging. Part (a) was fairly well done as 
most candidates understood the image being portrayed. Many candidates saw the image of the old man but few 
went further to see other things, for example, alone, quiet, hunched. 
Part (b), which assessed poetic technique, required candidates to identify the literary device and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates discussed the effectiveness of the device without identifying it and so could 
not be awarded full marks. Additionally, although the explanatory note said what Guardian was, some 
candidates creatively inferred it was a person. Effective responses identified the device as either metaphor or 
personification and suggested how the ‗drooling‘ captured the image of the newspaper slipping from Pa‘s grasp 
and the ways in which the falling newspaper and Pa‘s drooling are similar. 
Part (c) though not literary, posed some amount of difficulty for some candidates who merely connected Pa‘s 
‗silent rage‘ to his quiet surroundings or the fact that he is old. However, insightful responses made reference to 
line 5 ‗how seldom he laughed in those days‘ suggesting that Pa is angry now as he reflects that when he was 
young he did not really enjoy himself; Pa resents his own physical helplessness (evidence — his hands are no 
longer steady); ‗Pa can no longer control his thoughts‘(line 14), among others. 
Most candidates managed reasonable responses to Part (d) (i), which asked for two impressions of Pa. Some of 
the responses which were awarded full marks included: Pa was a role model; one who portrays positive attributes; 
other descriptors such as unflinching, solid, dependable, loyal, focused, and faithful. Part (d) (ii), however, posed 
a challenge for candidates who, instead of giving two words or phrases to support the impressions in (d) (i), 
-5- 
quoted entire sentences. Ideal responses mentioned ‗steady hands‘; ‗vices he declined‘ for phrases and ‗sacrifice‘, 
and ‗anchored‘ for words to support their claim. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item which proved challenging for those who said that the title was inappropriate. 
A few candidates did not commit but their responses pointed to either a positive or negative leaning. Candidates 
should be trained to take a position and to defend such a position. 
Question 3
Overall, candidates‘ responses indicated that they found the passage was manageable and interesting and within 
their experience. Part (a), which required candidates to provide two reasons why the narrator was upset was well 
done and candidates who did not earn full marks tended to ignore the instructions to confine their responses to 
paragraph one. It is important that candidates read the questions carefully to ensure that they provide the 
requirements of the question and so improve their ability to earn full marks. 
For Part (b), candidates were required to identify the literary device in a given phrase and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates did not name a device (in this case, metaphor) and others named incorrect 
devices and so did not earn the one mark for this part of the question. Additionally, some only attempted an 
explanation of the phrase and many did not know what ‗jellyfish‘ was. Those candidates who did justice to the 
question mentioned the mother‘s helpless shaking as she laughs and how the narrator feels like her mother is 
stinging her by not paying her any attention. 
Part (c), which assessed candidates‘ knowledge of irony was not well done. Many candidates did not identify the 
irony (located within the four lines given) or explain it. A complete response would have entailed the candidates 
explaining the nature of the contrast, that is, what was expected by the narrator (comfort, love, affection) versus 
what was received (being ignored by her mother) when she went home. 
Part (d) was fairly well handled. Candidates were required to indicate how the narrator felt after her mother 
confirmed she had eaten breadfruit and to support the response given. Once candidates identified the feelings, for 
example, that the narrator felt betrayed by her mother/ was distrustful of her mother/ was repulsed by her mother, 
they were able to supply the necessary evidence and were able to earn full marks. Responses which captured the 
crocodile image; the mother‘s laughter; or the mother being half in and half out the door got full marks. On the 
other hand, some candidates had difficulty providing supporting evidence. Some candidates identified the feeling 
before and not after as indicated in the question. Others did not identify the feelings but gave supporting 
quotations. 
Although Part (e) provided for reader response and allowed candidates to express their views, some were not clear 
about what they agreed or disagreed with. Quotations were cited but not enough to support a full and clear 
response to the question. Such responses did not allow candidates to earn full marks. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
1. Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for candidates to be exposed to literature. 
2. Discussing literary devices must be continued. It is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
3. Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage as a 
whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a 
thoughtful processing of the events described. 
-6- 
4. While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students offer to the 
questions. Too often, candidates‘ admissible responses to questions are inaccessible to those who do not 
share knowledge of their dialect. We therefore recommend that teachers give students the feedback on 
the Standard English translation of their correct responses to the questions. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1
Questions about the casket scenes tend to yield good responses. For this the first January sitting of the English B 
examination, five times as many candidates attempted Question 1 as against Question 2. For Part (a), which 
required candidates to describe the test set for Portia‘s suitors and the consequences of their choosing wrongly,
most candidates were able to describe the test, the types and inscriptions on the caskets. Many, however, were 
not as accurate in describing the consequences of the suitor‘s incorrect choice. 
Part (b) required some analysis of the correct selection of the caskets, that is, how the test would ensure that Portia 
married someone who truly loved her. Candidates were expected to suggest how the test was designed to sift the 
suitors by exposing those who were concerned with outward appearance, glamour and glitter as well as those who 
were arrogant and vain. This sifting would identify the one who was willing to countenance dire consequences (of 
a single life). Only the one who would be willing to look beyond the outward appearance (base lead) to inner 
qualities would be considered worthy. Although candidates mentioned Portia‘s physical attributes, many failed to 
mention the qualities of the suitors who would take such a risk. For the most part, the tendency in this part of the 
question was for candidates to gloss over the issue of outward appearance. 
-7- 
Part (c) was the most challenging to candidates. Some claimed that not enough information was given in the text 
about Shylock as a father, therefore they could not discuss him. Other candidates adopted a one-sided approach 
and did not see anything positive about Shylock. Many candidates missed the comparative element that was 
required. However, insightful responses mentioned that at heart, both fathers wanted what was best for their 
daughters (seeing that they married well) even though their methods were different. The fathers‘ attitude to wealth 
is the most obvious point of departure. Portia‘s father provides lavishly for her, whereas Shylock hoards his 
money; Portia‘s father puts her above money whereas Shylock would prefer to have Jessica dead and his jewels 
restored to him. 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and three (0.56%) of 539 candidates who 
attempted this question achieved the total score of 35. The mean for this question was 19.51. 
Question 2
Although the mercy speech is well known, this question was not a popular choice. Few candidates outlined the 
details of the speech: Shylock would be blessed if he is merciful; mercy is a mark of greatness; justice alone 
cannot lead to salvation; that if we want to be shown mercy, we must be merciful. Many candidates had difficulty 
remembering what Portia said about mercy. However, there were some insightful responses about the mercy 
shown to Shylock. Many candidates were au fait with the ‗theatrics‘ of the scene — the sharpened knife and 
Shylock‘s thirst for blood. 
The irony of the ‗merciful‘ Christians was not lost to the insightful candidates, but the details of Part (b) were 
lacking to a large extent. Gratiano‘s behaviour (his taunting of Shylock by telling him that soon he will not have 
enough money to buy cord to hang himself) and Shylock‘s reminder that these Christians were themselves 
slaveholders who treated their slaves like asses and dogs simply because they owned them, were some examples. 
Part (c), which required that candidates comment on the mercy shown to Shylock, proved to be challenging to 
many candidates. This part of the question assessed the writer‘s technique and required analytical strength from 
the candidates. If Part (b) were handled well, as in identifying the irony and inconsistencies of the Christians, 
candidates should have moved logically to Part (c). Weaker candidates merely repeated information used to 
respond to Part (b). Ideally, the use of dramatic irony and an interrogation of ‗mercy‘ (which is bitter-sweet) 
would have been sufficient for Part (c). This part of the question is essentially reader response and candidates 
must be confident in expressing their informed judgment. 
While none of the 99 (12%) candidates who attempted this question scored full marks, one candidate scored 34. 
The mean for this question was 12.61. 
Fences 
Question 3
Almost an equal distribution of candidates attempted the questions set on Fences. The text is widely known, and 
for Question 3, so were the ways in which Troy wronged his family. Although candidates were quite competent in 
discussing the ways in which he wronged Rose and Cory, some candidates were not able to discuss the ways in 
which Troy wronged Gabriel. Expected responses for the ways in which Cory wronged Gabriel included how he 
used Gabriel‘s disability money to fix his home; how he forced Gabriel to live with Miss Pearl and how he signed 
the committal papers to get some of his money. 
For Part (b), candidates were required to show how forgiveness and hope are presented dramatically in the final 
scene of the play. Most candidates demonstrated awareness of forgiveness and hope, but too many could not 
discuss how this was dramatically presented. Among the expected responses were: what Raynell represents (as 
-8- 
the new generation); Raynell‘s garden and the attendant symbolism; Raynell and Cory singing the blues; the 
presence of all whom Troy offended at the funeral; Gabriel‘s dance, among many others. 
Approximately 99 (11%) candidates attempted this question. The highest score achieved in this question was 32. 
The mean for this question was 17.86. 
Question 4 
Part (a) required candidates to discuss how Rose nurtured Troy, Cory and Raynell. Candidates‘ responses 
revealed that they were knowledgeable about Rose, and the ways in which she nurtured Troy, Cory and Raynell. 
Part (b) of the question was not handled as well. Candidates were required to show how Rose was both hurt and 
blessed in her relationship with Troy. Candidates‘ treatment of the subject was one-sided. Many were able to 
show how Rose was hurt, but were not able to do a similar treatment on how she was blessed. Candidates could 
have presented her as being ‗blessed‘ in the following ways: Troy gave her a roof over her head; he brought home 
his salary; seemed to have been faithful for a while; and was affectionate to her. 
Candidates, who adopt a dualistic interpretation of characters and situations as good or bad, black or white, 
generally see less subtlety and complexity than their open-minded peers. 
Poetry 
Question 5
Slightly over one-third of the candidates attempted Question 5 as against Question 6. Part (a) required candidates 
to describe two poems in which Nature and technology are in conflict. While candidates were able to describe the 
details in some degree, there was not enough about the conflict between Nature and technology. A few candidates 
were more accurate in their description by pointing to the contrast. Merely mentioning the deer on the winding 
road in ―Travelling through the Dark‖ or the presence of the Spaniards in the natives‘ territory in ―From the 
Emigrants‖, did not point sufficiently to the conflict between Nature and technology. This portion of the question 
demanded knowledge of the texts and it would appear that this pre-selection was not advantageous to candidates 
as many seemed to be more conversant with ―Travelling through the Dark‖ than ―From the Emigrants.‖
Part (b), which required candidates to identify a poetic device in each poem used to comment on the impact of 
Nature and technology and comment on the effectiveness proved to be challenging to the candidates. Even when 
devices were correctly identified, candidates failed to link them to the question (in this case the impact of 
technology on Nature) or comment on their effectiveness. 
Part (c) was for the most part, reader response. However, the ‗message‘ each poet is presenting through the 
portrayal of Nature and technology should be grounded in textual evidence. The deer in ―Travelling through the 
Dark‖ is supposed to be in its habitat and it is man‘s incursion that puts both deer and people in danger. The fate 
of the fawn is at the mercy or whim of man. Painful decisions are necessary for survival. Columbus‘ sojourn to 
the West Indies in ―From the Emigrants‖ had disastrous consequences. His encounter with the natives was an 
unequal one. Pitted against the bullets, spears and sea power, the natives did not stand a chance. Technology 
might win. 
This question was not well done. The highest mark earned was 28 and the mean mark was 9.33. Two hundred and 
forty-four candidates attempted this question. 
-9- 
Question 6
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name and discuss the theme of death. Part (a) asked 
candidates for a description of the situation that caused the speaker to think about death and Part (b), the reaction 
of each speaker to the encounter with death. For Part (b), many candidates confused the speaker and the poet. Part 
(b) was an opportunity for comparison of speakers, for instance, in terms of how the encounter with death is 
treated. All poems on the syllabus could have been used, although some clearly provided more ‗mileage‘ than 
others. Part (c) was as usual the most challenging as most candidates were not able to discuss the effectiveness of 
the poetic device even when correctly identified. The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in the 
discussion, there was the tendency to divorce the effectiveness of the device from the theme of death, indicated in 
the stem of the question. 
Three of the 542 candidates who attempted Question 6 earned 33 of the 35 marks. While this question did better 
than Question 5 with a mean of 14.71, a better performance in the Poetry Profile is desired. 
Prose Fiction
The comparative questions on West Indian and non-West Indian novels offer candidates the opportunity to 
explore themes, concepts and narrative techniques which can often allow them to see levels of meaning and 
understanding while they are discussing the question. The outstanding candidates demonstrate these flashes of 
insight as they approach the question from unique angles, interpreting power, or dreams and aspirations, or 
friendship in less obvious, but perceptive ways and using the comparison, whether stated or implied, to call 
attention to fresh ways of understanding. Competent scripts generally take the safe, literal, concrete interpretation 
of the question and the text and often merely demonstrate an accurate and appropriate reading of the storyline. 
Candidates will find greater enjoyment and fascination with the novels if they are encouraged to see the 
connotative and symbolic implications of the texts, a character like Beka or David or Billy or Alan as symbolic of 
a group or age or nation. That leap in understanding could make the most concrete, basic reader of a text offer 
exceptionally creative interpretations to these questions. There were several examples in this cohort where these 
gems were revealed. 
On the other hand, inappropriate use of texts resulted in reduction of marks. Some candidates were not conversant 
with the current texts or with the details necessary to answer the questions. In some instances, they lost marks 
(many times 50% of the content) because they used drama texts such as The Merchant of Venice or Fences to 
answer questions which are clearly genre-specific. Some candidates used popular fiction such as Harry Potter. In 
other instances, texts not on the prescribed list for Prose Fiction, such as A Cow Called Boy or old CSEC texts 
such as Green Days by the River and To Kill a Mockingbird were used. It was not unusual to find instances where 
candidates used their creativity to write their own life stories to answer the questions. In the latter case, no marks 
were awarded for that effort. 
Far too often the comparative nature was missing from the discussion. Many candidates merely narrated the texts, 
disregarding the question. 
Question 7
Approximately 212 (26%) of the candidates attempted this question. Candidates were required to discuss how a 
major character in one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel is oppressed by the power of another person 
or institution and struggles against oppression in a bid for freedom. Most candidates demonstrated knowledge of 
the characters who wielded power, but those who were powerless proved somewhat troublesome. Additionally, 
the second part of the question which focused on the struggles in the bid for freedom was often left undone. 
Candidates must ensure that they respond to all the areas of the task in order to access the marks. 
-10- 
While no candidate earned full marks for this question, one candidate scored 34. The mean mark for this question 
was 17.42. This was the highest mean in the section. 
Question 8
Question 8 was the most popular question for Prose Fiction. Approximately, 365 (45%) of the candidates 
attempted this question. Candidates were required to select a major character in a West Indian and and non-West 
Indian text who dreams of a better life and discuss the struggles that character goes through in attempting to make 
those dreams come through. Whereas candidates were proficient in articulating the dream of the major characters, 
they were not so sure-footed about the struggles. Similar to Question 7, candidates must ensure that they can 
competently address all aspects of the question before selecting it. 
While no candidate earned full marks for this question, one candidate scored 33. The mean mark for this question 
was 14.99, approximately, the same as Question 7. 
Question 9
Approximately 135 (17%) of the candidates attempted this question. Candidates were required to discuss the 
extent to which the statement ‗A good friend is better than money‘ applies to a major character in one West Indian 
and one non-West Indian novel. This question clearly demonstrated that candidates are quite knowledgeable of 
the content of the texts. They, however, displayed very little knowledge in critical analysis of the text and the 
question. 
Admirably, two candidates were able to earn the highest score of 35. The mean for this question was 15.16. 
Question 10
This was the least popular question in this section. It was attempted by approximately 95 (11%) of the candidates. 
The focus of this question was explicitly the writers‘ craft and many shied away from it. Some candidates who 
attempted it were able to make connections to the titles and texts; many simply narrated the stories or 
reconstructed the lives of the major characters. The writers‘ craft was not addressed and in many instances 
misunderstood. 
One candidate earned the highest mark of 35. The mean for this question was 10.25. It was the lowest mean for 
the section. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, Questions 5 
and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 7–10 (Prose Fiction). 
2. Candidates need to know that 2011 is the final year of the cycle for the May/June examinations and 
January 2012, for the January examinations. Knowledge of the revised syllabus is necessary. Candidates 
need to select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus to study for the May/June 2012 Examination 
for English B. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2011 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) examination in English B consists of two components — 
Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — 
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates’ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination.
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from each section.
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section.
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the other question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination.
The 2011 examination was the final May/June sitting of this cycle of texts. The January 2012 English B 
examination will see the completion of this cycle. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage.
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive
 Awareness of the interaction among characters
-3- 
There was a slight decline in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. 
The mean scores for Paper 01 for the period 2009–2011 in the table below show the trends in performance.
Mean Scores for the Period 2009–2011 
Paper 01 2009 2010 2011
DRAMA 7.02 11.00 10.22
POETRY 4.9 10.49 8.32
PROSE FICTION 8.43 7.47 8.09
It is noted that while performance declined when compared with that of 2010, performance was still better than 
that of 2009 for Drama and Poetry and consistent for Prose Fiction. 
Question 1: Drama
Nine hundred and fifty-five (4.90 per cent) of the candidates scored full marks on this question. This question 
tested knowledge of the difference between mere comprehension of the extract and awareness of genre and craft 
in the shaping of the extract. Teachers may consider the impact when, in preparation for the examination, students 
are not encouraged to master the art of answering questions in full sentences to ensure that they can get to the 
heart of the answer easier and to ensure that all parts of the question are addressed. 
Most candidates were able to score the full marks for Part (a), which indicates, happily, that teachers are paying 
closer attention to the structural elements of the genre. Responses to Parts (b), (d) and (e) indicate that some 
candidates are experiencing difficulty in drawing reasonable and supportable inferences from onstage events and 
character actions and motives. This central skill in literary study should be emphasized by teachers. A few 
candidates in their responses to Part (b) interpreted ‘relationship’ as marital, ignoring the literary use of the term. 
Some candidates erroneously felt that they had to use words from the text to describe Harold’s tone. One 
disappointing aspect of the response to Part(c) which focused on how Erma builds up suspense was that less than 
one third of the candidates provided an explanation; many candidates merely offered a summary of Erma’s 
actions. The candidates who offered an explanation were oftentimes able to score full marks. 
More than one third of the candidates earned full marks for Part (e) which required them to suggest a title for the 
extract. Candidates displayed their creative imagination in the wide and varied offering of titles and their 
rationales, based on a sensitive reading and response to the events in the extract. 
The mean score was 10.32 out of 15. 
Question 2: Poetry
Thirty-six (0.18 per cent) candidates scored full marks on this question. Most candidates earned full marks for 
Part (a), as they were able to identify the two signs, from the specified lines, which showed that someone had 
died. Most candidates were able to identify one image from the lines specified to answer Part (b), but had 
problems commenting on the effectiveness, as only approximately 25 per cent of the candidates gained full marks 
for this part of the question. For Part (c) (i), some candidates instead of making the connection with a minister of 
religion, inappropriately associated the ‘minister’ with a politician. Other candidates ignored the clues of the 
minister as presented in the poem and superimposed their expectations of his role as ‘provider of comfort,’ which, 
unfortunately, was not evident in the poem. 
-4- 
Candidates provided the evidence of something ‘horrible taking place’ for Part (c) (ii), but did not explain the 
horror. Approximately 25 per cent of the candidates gained full marks for this question. Responses to Part (d) 
indicate that teachers are prioritizing poetry as an oral medium, meant to be spoken and heard. Unfortunately, 
candidates had problems spelling words like ‘rhyme’ and ‘rhythm’. 
Many candidates misinterpreted Part (e) as they sought to explain the lines specified in the question, rather than 
identifying and commenting on the speaker’s feeling in those lines. Less than a third of the candidates earned full 
marks for Part (e), and few captured the cynicism, disbelief or irony that emerge from a sensitive reading of the 
poem, without the interference of the cultural experience of the reader. 
Teachers should guide students to focus attention on the poem itself, notwithstanding the need to draw on 
personal experience to frame an introduction to the experience of the poem. Ultimately, the poem itself may offer 
a different experience than what is expected, and students should be encouraged to confront that reality. 
Examiners suggest that teachers will continue to improve their students’ competence in poetry appreciation by:
• Allowing students to hear and recite poems and respond orally to what makes them appreciate the poem. 
• Teaching students how devices are used in poetry, beyond their ability to identify the devices. 
• Expanding students’ vocabulary of feeling words — for tone, mood and characters’ emotions which are 
inferred.
• Helping students to gauge the extent of content required for an answer by the marks allocated. 
The mean score was 8.32 out of 15. 
Question 3: Prose Fiction
Two hundred and eight (1.07 per cent) candidates scored full marks on this question. Most candidates were able 
to identify the mood for Part (a), but less than half of them indicated how the writer created the mood. 
Approximately the same number of candidates was able to earn full marks in Part (b) which required them to 
explain how the sentence, I had not expected to see him introduced a shift in the mood of the passage. Most 
candidates were able to identify the dialect as the feature which suggested that the passage was set in the 
Caribbean as required for Part (c), but for Part (d), candidates found it increasingly difficult to earn the four marks 
for explaining two ways in which the writer builds tension. Approximately 15 per cent of the candidates earned 
the maximum mark for Part (d). For Part (e), approximately 50 per cent of the candidates were able to earn one 
mark for a reason the narrator’s response to Mr Johnson was different from that of his friend. Responses to Part 
(e) (ii) demonstrated that only one-third of the candidates were able to capture and explain how Mr Johnson’s 
behaviour made the passage humorous because of his careful entanglement of the boys in their own tale. 
It is instructive that Question 1, Part (c), Question 2, Part (c) ii and Question 3, Part (d), which all test candidates’ 
ability to explain the writer’s technique, demonstrate a similar distribution or spread of marks. Teachers who are 
able to have students master the concept of the author deliberately manipulating the language and form of the 
genre to influence the feelings and thoughts of the reader or audience can be assured of excellent results. If 
teachers take this approach to the study of the set texts, candidates of the examination will have been prepared for 
the demands of Paper 01 where they can display their application of these competencies. 
The mean score was 8.09 out of 15.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage or poem as 
a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a 
thoughtful processing of the events described. Teachers need to help students expand that notion to embrace the 
more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in literature and life.
While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers/instructors are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions, to the dialect responses that students offer to the questions. 
-5- 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful attempts to 
have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and emotional 
responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation 
to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions, is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the 
study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 23 of the syllabus): 
(i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
(ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
(iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism
(iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses
(v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the shaping 
of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02
(vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text
(vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice
Question 1
The Shakespeare questions yielded 65 per cent of the total responses for the drama section. Most candidates 
demonstrated good knowledge of the text but some could not apply this knowledge to the question. For Part (a), 
candidates were asked to describe the love relationship of one pair of three pairs given. The most popular choice 
was Portia and Bassanio. Some candidates did not describe the relationship but gave summaries of the encounters 
between these couples. A few candidates ignored the instruction and discussed all three couples. Part (b) required 
a discussion of the obstacles encountered by the lovers in this relationship but candidates tended to identify the 
obstacles only and not show how these affected the relationship. Candidates did better in discussing the suspense
and disguise in Part (c). Here is a brief excerpt of a response that addresses Part (c), dealing with the element of 
disguise: 
The element of disguise is employed by Shakespeare to help overcome an obstacle but is also conveyed as an 
obstacle. Even Jessica’s conversion to Christianity can be seen as a ‘disguise’. She must hide her true identity for 
the sake of love. Although Lorenzo’s love is boundless, she must alter some characteristics for their relationship. 
This shows that true love always has some form of difficulty. 
There were a few candidates who confused irony and dramatic irony. 
Twenty-one candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 16.07 out of 35. 
-6- 
Question 2
This was the least popular drama question as only 290 candidates attempted it (1.48 per cent). This question 
focused on the minor characters Solanio and Salarino and their role in the play. Candidates readily accounted for 
the events in this scene and enjoyed relating its comic elements, as was required for Part (a), but Part (b) which 
asked for a discussion of the dramatic effect of this scene was not adequately handled. Expected responses 
included the humour created by the boys trailing Shylock; prophetic irony in Solanio’s remark that Antonio might 
suffer if he fails to keep his bond; the tension and suspense generated by their vivid descriptions/recounting and
how these characters functioned as the play’s ‘newspaper’ in dispensing the gossip. Part (c) required a connection 
of this scene to the play as a whole and suggested responses included the ways in which Solanio and Salarino
contributed to the economy of the drama since they reported on offstage events; their newspaper role (giving 
news on the Rialto); their support for Antonio and how they advanced the theme of money, a crucial theme in this 
play. 
One observation worth mentioning is that a few candidates confused the named scene with Act 3, Scene 1, in 
which Shylock appears onstage and questions Solanio and Salarino. This scene comes shortly after the one 
indicated in the question. 
No candidate scored full marks on this question. The mean for the question was 13.19 out of 35. 
Fences
Question 3
Twice as many candidates did Question 3 than Question 4. Writer’s craft is important in appreciating Wilson’s
(the playwright) expectations of the audience through the ways in which the feelings and thoughts about Troy are 
portrayed. Although candidates relished discussing Troy, many of them confused the thoughts with the feelings in 
Part (a) of the question. It was heartening though to see that candidates were aware that this head/heart dilemma 
could yield answers that were for, against or just ambivalent. Popular responses about the audience’s feelings
about Troy showed how he was presented at the beginning of the play as likeable, witty, engaging, romantic, and 
how Bono saw him as a leader (for the positive slant) and how he was presented as selfish/self-centred, as in his 
infidelity and treatment of Cory and Gabriel (for the negative slant). An ambivalent position saw Troy’s portrayal 
as one that evoked both sympathy and contempt from the audience. Responses about the audience’s thoughts 
about Troy would demonstrate how information about him is sequenced in the play (the good things first); how 
the audience learns about his difficult past; and having learned all of this, how do we now judge him? Part (b), 
being reader-response (giving their final opinion of Troy, with justification), yielded very good responses. Here is 
an example:
Troy is very unjust in his decision with not allowing Cory to go to college and live out his dream of playing 
football. Troy, however, uses his past failures to prevent his own son’s dream from happening. This was seen as 
selfish as he built a fence around Cory to keep society out and in the end it actually locked Cory out of his home. 
Troy is hardworking and is not pleased that he could not complete purchasing his house if it was not for money 
that was given to his brother Gabriel who was injured in the war. I don’t however blame Troy to some extent 
because he had a rough childhood. He was not given the emotional love as a child so he finds it hard to give this 
type of love to his son. His being locked up for fifteen years also shows how black men were unjustly treated and 
this has helped to drive an arrow of bitterness in Troy’s heart. 
Four candidates (0.09 per cent) scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.40 out of 
35. 
-7- 
Question 4 
Part (a) required knowledge of the pasts of Troy, Bono and Lyons. Candidates were very familiar with Troy’s past 
but had difficulty finding textual evidence for Bono and Lyons. Consequently, many of them lapsed into 
narration. Part (b) required discussion on one of these characters and demonstration of how Wilson shows the 
effect of the past on this character throughout the play. Some candidates discussed all three characters. Part (c), 
which asked for the issues about black men that Wilson was highlighting, caused much uncertainty as candidates 
seemed to have problems with the word/concept issues. However, some candidates offered acceptable responses 
such as their roles in the family (as in husband/wife relationship, parent/child relationship); role in the
community; how they perceive manliness, their attitude to and involvement in sports, and their attitude to racism. 
Four candidates (0.18 per cent) scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.97 out of 
35, the highest mean for the drama section. 
Poetry
Question 5
This question dealt with the portrayal of death in the poems “Traveling Through the Dark” and “Epitaph”. Part 
(a) asked candidates to describe what happens in each poem. Although most candidates were able to describe the 
events, in many instances key details were omitted, and, in some instances, candidates ‘invented’ details to fill the 
textual gap (as in the speaker hitting the deer or the white folks cheering the hanging body). On the whole, 
candidates were more comfortable with “Traveling Through the Dark” than “Epitaph” and it was quite common 
to have candidates confusing another poem on the syllabus, “The Lynching” with “Epitaph.” 
Part (b) required a discussion of the speaker’s attitude in each poem. Some candidates were cognizant of the 
complexity of the speaker’s attitude in “Traveling Through the Dark” as he is sensitive to the unborn fawn but 
practical in terms of adopting a philosophical attitude about death as he remains unswerving in his journey (which 
could also be a fitting metaphor for the road of life). The speaker’s attitude in “Epitaph” allows for more than one 
reading and insightful candidates argued either for one of anger or that of detachment. 
For Part (c), candidates were expected to identify and discuss one poetic device that each poet uses to capture the 
reader’s attention or create an emotional response in the reader. Many candidates identified a device but failed to 
provide textual evidence to support the submission. It was common to have devices selected at random that could 
not be connected to the poems. Some candidates were unable to show how the device evoked a particular 
response. Generally, it proved quite challenging for some candidates to discuss the devices and link this 
discussion to reader-response. This example infuses the device and the effect:
The poetic device of personification is used greatly to create an emotional response in the reader. The poet gives 
nature human qualities to gain sympathy from the reader and also to create suspense. When the reader sees the 
phrase, “nature listened”, we are made to feel the importance of the decision and the weight that must have been 
upon the persona. That the “car aimed its headlights” shows that technology, represented by the car, was ready 
to move on and move ahead.
Two candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 14.80 out of 35. 
-8- 
Question 6
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose two suitable poems from the prescribed list 
to answer the question set. Candidates seemed to have a strong preference for this kind of question as it yielded 
67 per cent of the responses. Model answers named two appropriate poems and described who/what is admired 
for Part (a). Popular choices were “Richard Cory”, “Coolie Mother” and “For My Mother (May I Inherit Half Her 
Strength)”. Part (b) asked for an identification and discussion of a poetic device in each poem showing this 
admiration. Discussion of the device was not a strong point for average candidates. The reader-response aspect of 
the question, Part (c), required candidates to supply textual support for a position as to which presentation of 
admiration is more appealing of the two poems. Some candidates merely repeated lines from the chosen poem to 
validate their claim. 
For this response, an encouraging number of candidates dealt well with Part (b) which asked them to show how 
the poet used a technique to present admiration. Many candidates were able to identify appropriate devices and 
explain how they were used by the poet to convey a sense of admiration. References to repetition in Goodison’s 
“For My Mother (May I Inherit Half Her Strength)” and McDonald’s “God’s Work” and personification in King’s 
“A Contemplation Upon Flowers” were well handled by candidates. Average candidates were only able to 
identify the devices and provide a limited explanation of the connection between the devices identified and the 
poet’s message. Weaker candidates for the most part only referred to the device without illustrating its relevance 
to a clearer understanding of admiration.
 Many candidates were able to give qualified justification regarding why they found one poem more appealing in 
its presentation of admiration than the other as required for Part (c). It was a delight to see many candidates 
drawing on their own experiences, and those issues in their society, such as strong mothers who sacrifice much 
for their children, to bolster their arguments for why an issue resonates with them. Weaker responses to this 
section were from candidates who appeared to lack the skills of argument and did not know the poems well. 
Twenty-three candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 17.57 out of 35. 
Prose Fiction
Question 7
This question on empathy gave candidate the opportunity to be objective and to evaluate through analysis, the 
phrase to what extent. The word encourage also suggests the ability of the writer to persuade the reader through 
his/her narrative technique. This question also asked the reader to personalize the experience of the major 
character in the texts chosen. Overall, some level of synthesis was expected in order for candidates to do well. 
Only 24 per cent of the candidates attempted this question and many ignored to what extent and gave very general 
submissions which did not fully integrate the content, writer’s style or their own personal responses. Many 
candidates did not concentrate on major characters and far too many used ‘sympathy’ and ‘empathy’
interchangeably. 
Teachers need to concentrate a bit more on teaching point of view. 
Ten candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for the question was 16.15 out of 35. 
-9- 
Question 8
This question asked candidates to identify from each text, a major character and to show how the exposure to love 
changed him/her or impacted him/her positively or negatively. Many candidates had challenges in saying how
love changed the character. There was a heavy concentration on romantic love as against other types, for 
example, parental love and love between friends. Those who chose A Kestrel for a Knave spoke mainly about 
Billy and the hawk and very few about Billy and Mr Farthing. Some candidates had problems navigating the 
race/class dimension of the relationships in The Hummingbird Tree. Although traditionally love is a popular 
choice, only 23 per cent of the candidates attempted this question. 
No candidate scored full marks. The mean for this question was 16.10 out of 35. 
Question 9
This question, which focused on the roles of mothers, proved to be the most popular question in the prose section, 
with almost 37 per cent of the candidates attempting it. Appropriate coverage of this question would have 
included the mothers’ actions and influence, and how this influence shapes the characters and events. How the 
mothers’ role contributes to any theme/issue in the texts and how the writers’ technique help to show the mothers’ 
role would also constitute part of the discussion. Far too many responses merely listed the litany of woes about 
Billy’s mother, for example, or in other instances, discussed the behaviour of the women in the texts. 
The responses to this question were also affected by candidates’ poor choice of characters in the texts as some 
characters were never developed enough for students to write much about their roles. Another concern is the 
perennial one of candidates not mindful that they are comparing and contrasting. While it is expected that 
candidates will focus on the issues in the question for each text above anything else, it is also good practice for 
them to demonstrate an awareness of how the novelists treat similar issues and to use the language that indicates 
this awareness. The very good responses not only showed a grasp of both issues of the mothers’ role and their 
influence on others but drew attention to the similarities or differences in the treatment of such issues. 
Teachers are being asked to pay attention to having students adduce support for points they make as far too many 
of them make points without giving adequate support from the text. Good responses for this question clearly 
identified the issues, supported them well from the text, argued coherently and demonstrated an awareness of the 
comparative nature of the question. Weaker responses, for the most part, narrated without paying much attention 
to the skills demanded. 
Five candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.86 out of 35. 
Question 10
This was the least popular question, with only approximately 15 per cent of the candidates attempting it. To 
examine enclosed spaces is to see whether the characters are freed or shackled in the process. Many candidates
did not consider the longing for freedom on the part of the entrapped. Flexible interpretations of entrapment went 
beyond the literal. Average responses were limited to physical spaces but there were superior responses that saw 
entrapment from a metaphorical perspective and explored the psychological, social and racial spaces. 
Seven candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 20.05 out of 35, 
the highest for the prose section. 
-10- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
 Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice limits 
the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments.
 Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres, for example, using a Drama text to answer the 
question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this a genre-specific 
examination.
 The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays.
 Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen vocabulary, 
grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find opportunities to give 
small writing tasks (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students such as 
 exercises which target introductory paragraphs
 finding textual evidence to develop one point. 
 Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the movie version, 
for instance).
 Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area.
 While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and/or reading the poems, for instance, teachers
are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the language to 
describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening 
and speaking.
 Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument of 
the writers’ style, but is also ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to explore, question, form 
judgements and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what 
is sometimes captured in superior scripts.
 Candidates need to be reminded that 2011 was the final cycle of the May/June examinations and January 
2012, for the January (re-sit) examinations. Knowledge of the new syllabus (and by extension the new 
cycle) is necessary, especially in relation to text selection. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2012
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of 
three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These 
modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each 
question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short answers. Fifteen marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of ten optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from each section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type-A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. 
Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this 
section. Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type-B questions. These are questions of comparison. 
Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, 
Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, 
Question 6, candidates must choose two appropriate poems from those they have studied to answer the 
question set. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. Section C, Prose Fiction, 
consists of four Type-B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non-West 
Indian novels in English. These texts are specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function 
effectively in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
Candidates‘ performance on Paper 01 was below that of 2011. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 
1, Drama, was 8.95; in Profile 2, Poetry, 8.97; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 7.34. The weakest 
performance was in Prose Fiction. 
-3- 
Question 1 
The more able candidates (47.6%) were able to access marks which ranged from 10 to 15 (15 marks being 
the maximum). The extract seemed to have resonated with candidates and many were able to appreciate 
the humour. 
Most of the candidates were able to earn the full marks allocated to Part (a). This question asked 
candidates to identify the ―important day‖ in the extract. Part (b), comprising two parts, probed Celsus‘s 
view of himself as being ―ca-coa‖. Whereas candidates could identify two other images such as being a 
dead man or being tied up, many of them could not explain what these images suggest about Celsus‘s
condition. Acceptable responses included the feeling of hopelessness; the feeling of having no future; the 
feeling of unhappiness (going to a funeral) and the feeling of having his freedom taken away. Some 
candidates merely repeated the idea that Celsus feels he was bewitched. 
Part (c) asked for textual support for the two different attitudes to marriage presented in the extract. 
Candidates rightly understood that the comparison lay between Celsus and Mr Jack but many could not 
name the attitude, for example, pride, on Mr Jack‘s part (his early marriage and defense of his wife‘s 
good name) and Celsus‘s fear and even resentment since he thinks that his wedding day is more in 
keeping with going to a funeral. 
Candidates were spot on in identifying one comic incident in Part d (i) but they were not as sure-footed on 
the dramatic functions of Helen‘s exit and entrance in Part (d) (ii). Many candidates could not move 
beyond the literal. Very few saw that Helen‘s exit (to get the drink) was a means of clearing the stage to 
allow Celsus and Mr Jack to become the focus of attention (taking centre stage). When she enters with the 
drink, the men are fighting so Helen‘s presence could be that she is the one to break up the fight and ease
the tension onstage. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item (suggesting a title and justifying the selection). The onus was on 
candidates to take a position then provide textual evidence to support the position taken. Many candidates 
scored full marks as they were able to support their claim. However, some candidates moved outside of 
the text. Candidates need to remember that reader-response items are always text-based. 
Question 2 
Candidates performed best on Question 2, Poetry, with more candidates earning full marks, as against 
Drama and Prose Fiction. For Part (a), candidates were able to identify two activities in the first stanza, as 
they were attuned to the crab-catching event and the reactions of the speaker and his sister Ruby. 
Part (b) asked candidates to state one difference between stanza 1 and 2 using evidence from the text. 
Some candidates confused stanzas with line numbering. Acceptable responses indicated the differences in 
time (past and present, as in Ma was alive in the first stanza but dead in the second stanza); the 
geographical location is also different (the savannah versus America and England); and the difference in 
mood (light-hearted innocence and fun as against the dislocation, decay and fear). 
Part (c) assessed poetic technique and required candidates to identify one literary device and comment on 
its effectiveness. Although candidates were provided the prompts (the lines as well as phrases for 
discussion were listed) many of them ignored the instruction and discussed all three devices, instead of 
choosing one. Many candidates were unable to name the device in ―squelching through mud‖ and even 
though some of the responses captured the sound of bare feet treading through the mud, many did not 
mention onomatopoeia. Many candidates identified the personification in ―Death long catch Ma‖ but were 
short on commenting on the personification of death. Responses discussing the inevitability of death and 
-4- 
the passage of time were acceptable. Another personification was seen in ―the house boarded up/breeding 
wasps‖. Although many candidates pointed to the decay and disuse, better responses discussed the 
absence of warmth/human presence and the fact that destructive insects have now inhabited the house. 
Candidates had a fair sense of the feelings of the speaker (he is afraid to return home; his feelings of 
guilt; and his reluctance to face the past) and Part (d) asked candidates to suggest two such feelings. 
Part (e) (i), which asked candidates to comment on the poet‘s use of the crab image, was the most 
challenging task. Responses were vague. It would appear that the word image was not easily understood. 
Acceptable responses could have included any of the following: the crab as a source of food; 
representing communal living; the mother is compared to a crab; and the idea of doubleness 
(mating/family) and singleness (absence of family). 
Part (e) (ii) was a reader-response item which only proved challenging for those who did not have 
‗strong‘ justification for providing another title for the poem. 
Question 3 
Candidates‘ responses to both sections of Part (a) demonstrated that they understood why Aunt Lissy 
slapped the boy and that they could identify an expression that showed the intensity of the slap. Most 
candidates could select a suitable image to present the relationship between Aunt Lissy and the 
pickaninnies such as herd of pickaninnies or a stork among the chicks scurrying behind Aunt Lissy in Part 
(b) but could neither determine the relationship nor comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses 
that commented on the effectiveness of the image of ―herd of pickaninnies‖ captured the idea of Aunt 
Lissy as leader who will whip the other animals into submission, and ―herd‖ reinforcing the animal 
imagery. The image of ―a stork‖ is effective as the maturing boy is seen as a maturing stork to be 
separated from the other chicks which are dependent on Aunt Lissy. Also captured here is the bird image 
through the movement of the children (scurrying) and the contrast in height and demeanour of the boy 
and the other children. Other candidates described the relationship but failed to identify the image. Some 
candidates looked at the relationship between Aunt Lissy and the boy and ignored the other children. 
Part (c) required candidates to give two impressions of the boy which are created and textual support for 
these impressions. Some candidates lost marks because they did not treat the question in its entirety. 
Some candidates mentioned the impressions but did not provide textual support while others cited 
lines/phrases from the passage but did not provide the impressions. The following are acceptable 
responses: the boy is defiant or determined because he thought of the word [Damballah] in his mind/ he 
refused to cry; the boy is independent because he thought of a time when he will be rid of Aunt Lissy when 
he is no longer under her control or his thinking of a time when he will be doing manly things. 
While most candidates were able to identify what was ―heathen talk‖ in Part (d) and were able to 
comment on Aunt Lissy‘s value system to some extent, they missed the point that she rejected her own 
roots, and was embracing instead only what was American in a bid to wipe out all references to her past. 
For Part (e), candidates were required to identify the literary device in a given phrase and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates identified the device (in this case, metaphor) but were unable to 
assess its effectiveness. Others commented on the effectiveness but did not name the device. The 
metaphor in this instance compares the confusion caused by Aunt Lissy’s instructions, warnings and 
admonitions to the cacophonous cackle of chickens. This reinforces the imagery of the hen with the 
brood of chickens. The animal imagery reinforces the fact that he does not see Aunt Lissy’s protectiveness 
as welcoming (seeing her cackle as noise in his head). 
-5- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of style. It 
is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. Some devices such as onomatopoeia 
proved problematic to many candidates. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at 
meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the performance element of the genre. 
 Teachers could assist students to dramatize sections of plays in class, for example, dramatize 
scenes and to summarize scenes to encourage recall. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to 
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
-6- 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1 
Part (a) required candidates to describe what happens in Act V, Scene I in which Portia and Nerissa 
quarrel with their husbands about the missing rings. Most candidates focused on the ring episode only, 
with no mention of others who were not directly involved in the couples‘ quarrel. Other details in this 
scene include the romantic moonlight setting with Lorenzo and Jessica, who were left in charge of 
Portia‘s house and Lancelot‘s announcement of Portia‘s pending arrival. Some candidates concentrated 
only on what happened after the wives‘ confrontation. Generally, it would appear that since this is a 
‗minor‘ scene, candidates were not sufficiently familiar with it. 
For Part (b), candidates did a fairly good job of identifying a theme emanating from this scene). 
However, some of them could not sustain the discussion to treat this theme in light of this scene. However 
insightful candidates discussed themes such as love, friendship/loyalty, money, appearance versus reality, 
power, the role of women, fidelity, and commitment. 
Part (c) asked for a discussion of two techniques Shakespeare used to entertain the audience. Appropriate 
responses would include dramatic irony (as in disguise in the courtroom scene and the ring episodes); 
pun (Gratianio’s threat to mar the young clerk’s ‘pen’); suspense (casket and courtroom scenes). 
Candidates need to be more sensitive to dramatic techniques as distinctive features of this genre. 
The total score of 35 was not achieved by any candidate. However, one candidate scored 33. The mean 
for this question was 10.42. 
Question 2 
Candidates were asked to describe the events in Act III Scene IV, when Portia tells Nerissa, ―We‘ll see 
our husbands before they think of us,‖ for Part (a). Apart from mentioning that Portia tells Nerrissa that 
they would be disguised as men and travel to Venice to meet their husbands, candidates were very short 
on details in this section of the question. Very few of them mentioned the role Lorenzo plays in this 
scene, impressing on Portia how fine a gentleman Antonio was; that he was left in charge of Belmont
while Portia takes her journey and the plans Portia sets in motion by sending her servant to her cousin 
Bellario, seeking his notes and garments. 
Part (b) required discussion of how disguise is used in one scene or instance in the play. Most candidates 
relished in the courtroom scene for the discussion of disguise. A few candidates mentioned how Jessica 
disguised herself as a boy and escaped her father’s house to marry Lorenzo. 
Commenting on the dramatic significance of disguise, (Part c), proved to be challenging to some 
candidates, who merely repeated information from Part (b). This section was open to the play as a whole, 
giving candidates full scope for discussion. Responses could have included: dramatic irony in that the 
wives (and the audience of course) know their husbands during the courtroom scene but they did not; 
Portia uses her disguise to save her husband’s friend’s life; disguise (men’s clothing) as a symbol of 
power; the advancement of the plot and development of themes; humour and entertainment. 
The following recommendations will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean texts (and 
drama as a whole): 
-7- 
 Find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even the minor scenes). 
 Dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations and discussion of scenes/excerpts. 
 Use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic techniques work. 
 Prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic techniques. 
Like Question 1, no candidate achieved the total score but one scored 33. The mean for this question was 
13.80. 
Fences 
Question 3 
Almost twice as many candidates attempted the questions set on The Merchant of Venice as against
Fences. For Question 3, Parts (a) and (b) required knowledge of what led to the specific events of Act II 
Scene IV, when Cory retorts, ―You ain‘t never give me nothing!‖ Candidates did not handle this question 
well. Events leading up to his outburst include Troy’s refusal to sign the permission papers for Cory 
which would have enabled him to be recruited to play college football; Troy’s poor parenting skills and 
lack of fatherly affection, even though he provides for his son materially; Cory’s deepening disrespect for 
Troy when he had Gabriel committed; when he had the affair with Alberta and was physically abusive to 
Ruth. 
Knowledge of the scene was important in answering Part (b) in terms of what the audience learns, such as 
the following: Rose is continuing to care for Raynell even though she is estranged from Troy; Troy is 
promoted at work and is driving but appears to be lonely as he is not so close to Bono anymore; Cory is 
hurt by his father’s unfaithfulness and exploitation of Gabriel. 
The greatest challenge was noted in Part (c) which dealt with dramatic significance. Candidates seemed to 
simply resort to telling what happened in the cited scene instead of focusing on how this scene impacts 
the play as a whole. The dramatic significance of this scene can be noted in these ways: Troy is at his 
worst here, in terms of all his relationships and this scene anticipates the hopefulness at the end of the 
play and the ways in which he will be redeemed; the culmination of the tension between father and son; 
the high energy in this scene is a fitting contrast to other quieter, humorous or even romantic scenes; 
ironically Troy is advancing at his workplace but things could not be worse at home; Cory being evicted 
is contrasted to earlier scenes when he is happily off to playing football or in the later scene, when he 
returns, smart and self-assured in his military uniform. 
The mean for this question was 11.74. The highest mark obtained for this question was 30. 
Question 4 
Parts (a) and (b) were not as problematic as the final part of Question 4. Part (a) required candidates to 
show what Rose wants Cory to understand by her statement, ―Your daddy wanted you to be everything he 
wasn‘t…‖ Candidates were expected to mention some of the many instances when Troy‘s behaviour and 
action suggested that he wanted his son to be more successful than he. Troy wanted better for Cory and 
that was why he bullied him so much; he did not want Cory to be affected as he did by racism so he 
discouraged him from football and encouraged him to further his education; he wanted Cory to be strong, 
independent and honest. 
-8- 
In seeking to respond to how Rose influences the audience‘s feelings about Troy in the end, Part (b) dealt 
with Rose‘s ability to affect the reaction of the audience in responding to Troy. Her reception of the 
family and Bono into the home gives the image of a reunited family. Rose’s response to Cory’s initial 
refusal to attend Troy’s funeral (her view that it was unthinkable that a boy could disrespect his daddy in 
this way) shows the audience that with all his faults, Troy is to be honoured and respected. Even though 
Troy had hurt people, Rose is in support of his memory and the audience believes her when she notes that 
even though Troy wasn’t always right, his intentions were good. 
Like Question 3, the highest score for this question, obtained by one candidate, was 30. The mean for this 
question was 9.08. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
Slightly under 50 per cent of the candidates attempted Question 5 as against Question 6. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the situation which caused the speaker‘s dream not to be fulfilled in ―The 
Carpenter‘s Complaint‖ and ―Dreaming Black Boy‖. For the most part, candidates were able to describe 
the situation in both poems although some responses were vague in that the former poem, the speaker‘s 
anger at being deprived of the chance of making his friend‘s casket and the latter, the racist society in 
which the speaker lived, were glossed over. 
Part (b) was reader response in that candidates were to use textual references to discuss which speaker in 
the two poems was more appealing. Candidates tended to find the boy in ―Dreaming Black Boy‖ more 
appealing (arguing that the adult carpenter in the other poem faced a different and less damaging kind of 
discrimination) but could not, in some instances, justify their position. 
Part (c) proved to be challenging and here candidates were asked to identify and comment on one poetic 
device used to explore the idea of unfulfilled dreams. For ―The Carpenter‘s Complaint‖, the most 
common submission was the simile stand up straight as a plumb-line but there are others that could be 
mentioned and discussed. The use of repetition (repeated use of the ―I‖; ―big-belly‖, ―big-shot‖, ―it hot 
me‖, ―it burn me‖) reinforces and enhances the simmering anger and resentment which boils over into 
rage. Contrast also is used to allow the reader to appreciate the passion of the carpenter, as insights are 
gained about his dead friend and the extent of the snub (depriving him of participating in the final ritual). 
Therefore, the living and the dead; the burning anger of the speaker against the recollected memory of his 
friend‘s cool demeanour (―walk/Home cool, cool, cool‖) and the one-voiced ranting of the carpenter 
versus the ‗silence‘ of his audience in the rum bar are other examples of contrast. Irony is also used in this 
poem when the carpenter mentions ―Mr Belnavis.‖ Clearly, the speaker is ridiculing this more socially 
acceptable gentleman. 
Repetition (especially of ―I wish‖) is also used in ―Dreaming Black Boy‖ and candidates made references 
to this. This refrain highlighted the speaker‘s alienation and isolation, dreams and fears. And this wishing 
deepens the pathos. Contrast could be mentioned in that the poem presents a series of contrasts between 
the boy‘s dreams and the reality of his situation. This serves to heighten the intense pain and anxiety of a 
boy whose dreams will never be realized in this racist society. Allusions are also used in this poem and 
apart from Paul Robeson, all other allusions are negative — the ―powers‖, ―hotel keepers‖, ―torch 
throwers‖ and ―plotters.‖ These negative allusions provide a contrast to the boy‘s dreams and reinforce 
the level of bigotry in the society. 
The mean for this question was 8.80. The highest score achieved for this question, by one candidate, was 
34. 
-9- 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name and discuss the theme of conflict. Part 
(a) asked candidates for an explanation of the conflict and Part (b), the reaction of each speaker to the 
conflict. All poems on the syllabus could have been used, but it was evident that some candidates were 
unprepared in their selection. Part (c) was, as usual, the most challenging as most candidates were not 
able to discuss the effectiveness of the poetic device even when correctly identified. The tendency was to 
explain and not analyse. Further, in some instances only one device was identified. If this is to be 
acceptable, the candidates must show its effectiveness (textually) in both poems. Sometimes there was 
the tendency to divorce the effectiveness of the device from the portrayal of conflict. 
This question was the only question where the total score was achieved. The mean for this question was 
12.11. 
Prose Fiction
The comparative questions on West Indian and non-West Indian novels offer candidates the opportunity 
to explore themes, concepts and narrative techniques which can often allow them to see levels of meaning 
and understanding while they are discussing the question. 
On the other hand, inappropriate use of texts resulted in reduction of marks. Some candidates were not 
conversant with the current texts or with the details necessary to answer the questions. In some instances, 
they lost marks (many times 50 per cent of the content) because they used drama texts such as The 
Merchant of Venice or Fences to answer questions which were clearly genre specific. It was not unusual 
to find instances where candidates used their creativity to write their own life stories to answer the 
questions. In the latter case, no marks were awarded for that effort. 
Far too often the comparative nature was missing from the discussion. Many candidates merely narrated 
the texts, disregarding the question. 
Question 7 
Candidates were required to discuss the extent to which the statement the desire for freedom is universal 
is applicable to a major character in one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel. Generally, 
candidates demonstrated a clear understanding of the question. However, candidates tended to write 
generally on the idea of freedom, making historical references without textual support, in some instances. 
The highest score obtained was 28. The mean for this question was 11.63. 
 Question 8 
This was the most popular question for Prose Fiction. Approximately, 50 per cent of the candidates 
attempted this question. Candidates were required to select a major character in a West Indian and non￾West Indian text who experiences challenges. For each novel, candidates had to discuss the challenges 
faced by the character. Candidates displayed their ability to identify and elaborate on a range of 
challenges from the characters‘ experiences and showed their engagement with the texts they selected. 
Some of them even selected texts which were on previous and upcoming cycles. 
The highest score obtained was 34. The mean for this question was 14.35. 
-10- 
Question 9 
This was the least popular prose question as less than 80 candidates attempted it. Candidates were asked 
to discuss how the writers help readers to sympathize with a child or young adult in one West Indian and 
one non-West Indian novel. They, however, displayed very little knowledge in critical analysis of the 
texts and the question. Many responses yielded inappropriate texts (the use of poems and plays) and this 
affected candidates‘ overall marks. 
The mean for this question was 13.37. The highest score obtained was 34. 
Question 10 
This question focused on prompting candidates to appreciate the writers‘ craft and many shied away from 
it. Some candidates who attempted it did not go much beyond discussions on the women generally and a 
few ventured to discuss the role of women in the texts. 
 
The mean for this question is 6.14. The highest score obtained was 26. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02,
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 7–10 (Prose Fiction). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the discrete nature 
of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for candidates to sharpen their 
essay-writing skills.
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of texts, 
for example, using websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Attention must be paid to all parts of questions. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
 An unusually large proportion of candidates did not attempt all three questions required in Paper 
02, largely because they were caught in the difference between the cycles of the syllabus. They 
were prepared for the June 2012 paper, but were entered for the January 2012 examination, the 
last of its cycle. This accounts for the significant decline in performance in this cycle‘s results. 
Teachers are strongly advised to note the difference in focus especially in the Prose section, the 
changes in the Drama texts and the alterations in the selected poems. The change in set texts will 
seriously handicap candidates who are not prepared. 
-11- 
 Candidates need to know that June 2012 is the beginning of the new cycle. Knowledge of the 
revised syllabus is necessary. For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative 
questions will be those set on the Short Stories. All other prose questions will be on single 
texts. Candidates need to select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus to study for 
the May/June 2012 examination for English B. 
 C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2012 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each 
mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles 
which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give 
approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for each question for a total of 60 
marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from each section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of 
the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second 
question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which they have studied to 
answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to
choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
The 2012 examination was the beginning of the new cycle of texts. There was also a change in the ratio 
of the weighting of the Papers and the addition of the short story in Paper 02. Additionally, the question 
type in the Prose Fiction section was changed from Type B to Type A. Generally, performance this year 
using the revised syllabus was quite satisfactory and it is envisaged that performance will improve in the 
next sitting.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how effectively these 
elements function in the passage. 
-3- 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
There was a decline in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. This is the first year in 
which each question was worth a maximum of 20 instead of the usual 15 marks. 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 
2010–2012: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for the Period 2010–2012 
Paper 01 2010 2011 2012
DRAMA 73.33% 68.13% 60.30%
POETRY 69.93% 55.46% 53.70%
PROSE 49.80% 53.93% 50.60%
Candidate‘s performance on Drama continues to be better than performance on the other genres. Efforts 
to improve performance in the other two genres must be undertaken in the various countries which 
register candidates for the subject. 
Question 1: Drama
Overall, 132 (0.68%) of the 19,502 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) (i) of the question tested candidates‘ ability to identify setting and Part (a) (ii) tested on-stage 
characters as opposed to characters off stage. These were very basic questions on the genre; however, 
some candidates mistakenly identified the setting as a lunchroom or some kind of eating establishment, 
instead of the police station. Students must be taught that setting could also include time (as in midday or 
lunch time). For the second part of the question, most candidates were able to identify the characters on 
stage (as against the off-stage Mrs Stevenson). 
Most candidates were able to score full marks for Part (b), which asked for two details of the impending 
murder. Part (c) posed a challenge to candidates in terms of explaining the dramatic effect of Duffy‘s 
casual manner and Mrs Stevenson‘s anxiety. Instead of focusing on the dramatic effects created, many 
candidates discussed the behaviour of the characters without saying what effect it had on the characters. 
Acceptable responses included the heightened tension created in the urgency to respond to Mrs 
Stevenson’s report; the contrast also evoked humour, in that Duffy’s action did not match the seriousness 
of the situation which Mrs Stevenson was reporting; the contrast also underscored the two characters—
Duffy’s calm and measured tone against Mrs Stevenson’s agitated and flustered speech. Full marks were 
awarded to candidates who moved from mere explanation of contrast to commenting on the effect on the 
audience. 
For Part (d) candidates were required to say how the stage directions contributed to characterization OR 
plot OR mood. This was fairly well done by some of the candidates. Some, however, merely defined 
stage directions and did not use the excerpt to answer the question. Acceptable responses included, for 
example, the instance when Duffy ‘double-takes’ when he heard that Mrs Stevenson wanted to report a 
murder (this showed his professionalism and care because he thought it was a ‘real’ murder); the 
audience experienced a brief moment of anxiety, then relief at the ironic interplay between Duffy and 
Mrs Stevenson. 
-4- 
Part (e)(i), which required candidates to identify one instance when Mrs Stevenson‘s tone of voice 
changed and the second part, a reason for this, did not pose too much of a challenge for candidates. Most 
of them cued in to the stage directions ‗trying to impress him‘; ‗relieved‘ and ‗impatiently‘ and supplied 
reasonable text-based responses to support their claims. 
Responses to Part (f), which required candidates to state what Mrs Stevenson was beginning to realize in 
lines 41–43, proved that they were able to deduce correctly, as many scored full marks for this part. Most 
candidates indicated that Mrs Stevenson is realizing that the details of the planned murder are closely 
connected to the details of her situation and therefore she may be in danger.
Candidates displayed creativity and imagination in their responses to Part (g), which required them to 
suggest a title for the scene and to justify their choices. Their suggestions were varied and their 
justifications based on a careful and sensitive reading of the extract. 
Two thousand eight hundred and eighty-five (14.75%) of the 19,502 candidates who attempted this 
question earned marks between 15–20. Only 132 (0.68%) earned the full mark of 20. The total mean for 
this question was 12.06 out of 20. This was the highest mean achieved of the three genres tested. 
Question 2 
Seventy-six (0.39 %) of the 19,495 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. For this 
question the more challenging parts for the candidates, based on their responses, were Parts (c) and (f).
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in indicating that the aim of the poet was to describe/celebrate 
the birth and achievement of Pele, the great Brazilian footballer and were able to earn the full 2 marks. 
Part (b) required candidates to comment on the effectiveness of line 3. Many candidates were able to see 
the dramatic impact of the ‗scoring‘, through the magnifying of the one word, and the overall joyous 
reaction to the victory and so earn full marks. It was disappointing to note, however, that some 
candidates did not attempt this part of the question. 
Part (c) required candidates to explain what was suggested in lines 4–5. Acceptable responses 
acknowledged the pun (sun/son) and captured the role this boy would play in his mother‘s life and the 
world at large. Many candidates focussed on the ‗sun‘ and not the ‗son‘. 
Part (d) required candidates to identify and comment on the figurative device in line 10 of the poem. For 
the most part, candidates identified the simile in Part (d) but the commentary was lacking. An acceptable 
response was the simile is effective in that it captures the fluid and graceful movement of Pele and this 
image reinforces his skill. This weakness in candidates‘ responses in addressing the effectiveness of the 
poet‘s use of a device is highlighted in most of the subject reports. Efforts to address this weakness in the 
classroom must be undertaken. 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to explain the image in lines 4–11. Here we see the image of nature 
(sun, moon, stars) and the celestial elements playing a part in honing his talent in preparing him for 
greatness. Candidates‘ responses indicated that they understood the image, the challenge was in 
expressing their ideas. 
Instead of comparing the first and last three lines in the poem, as was required for Part (f), many 
candidates explained the lines and paid little attention to similarities and differences. Acceptable 
responses included the scoring (the physical birth and the celebratory scoring); both are seen as heavenly 
accomplishments and earth shattering events; one suggests a loud deafening reaction and the other 
suggests stunned silence. 
-5- 
Most candidates did exceptionally well on Part (g), both in providing another title for the poem and using 
text-based evidence to justify their choice. 
Two thousand two hundred and forty (11.49%) of the 19,495 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 15–20. Seventy-six (0.39%) earned the full mark of 20. The mean for this question 
was 10.74 out of 20. 
Question 3 
The means for Question 3 in the table above indicate that Prose Fiction posed the most difficulty to 
candidates over the three-year period. 
While candidates were able to score full marks in several parts of Questions 1 and 2, most candidates did 
not score full marks on many of the parts of Question 3. Part (d) proved most challenging. Candidates 
had difficulty understanding the word ‗effect‘ and some ended up paraphrasing the two phrases they
selected from the three provided. Acceptable responses for ‗the river moved swiftly…‘ included the 
reinforcement of danger; ‗clothes fanning out…‘ included the sense of freedom, though short-lived, of 
floating/the look of the clothes buoyed by water; ‗shot to the surface‘, the sudden ejection/the power of 
the release. 
Candidates responded well to Part (a), which required them to identify where the incident was taking 
place and support their answer with evidence. Candidates also responded fairly well to Parts (b) and (c). 
However, these parts of the question accounted for only six (30%) of the marks. 
Of note is that some candidates stopped at Part (e) and did not turn the page (even though the instruction 
was there in capital letters) to view the remaining Parts (f) and (g) and consequently lost seven marks. 
This was an error as most of the candidates‘ responses to the question up to this point showed that they 
were doing reasonably well. This is indicative of poor test-taking strategies and teachers are reminded
that they should incorporate such strategies into their teaching of the subject. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the stimulus 
material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning 
based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. Teachers need to help students expand that 
notion to embrace the more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in Literature and life.
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers/instructors are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students 
offer to the questions. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations 
and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students‘ autonomous thought, 
bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the 
critical and creative thinking that the study of Literature is meant to engender. 
-6- 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness 
and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Questions 1 and 2, which are set on the Shakespeare text A Midsummer Night’s Dream, yielded almost 
one-half of the total responses for the drama section. Question 1 was far more popular than Question 2. 
Almost four times as many candidates attempted Question 1as against Question 2. 
This question sought to elicit from candidates, facts about any two sets of minor characters (from the 
three sets given); it further required them to identify and show dramatic situation(s) in which the two 
selected sets come together and finally, discuss the dramatic function of one set of the characters they 
described in Part (a). Answers from candidates showed extremely diverse interpretations, with the 
identification and discussion of the dramatic situation being the most challenging. This particular portion 
of the question encouraged a certain amount of latitude and candidates‘ responses embraced the approach 
of either looking at one situation which featured both sets of characters or two separate situations in 
which each pair is featured. 
Acceptable responses to Part (c) mentioned, for the characters Theseus and Hippolyta, how the court of 
Theseus and Hippolyta provided the setting for the conflict; how Theseus introduced the theme of love; 
that the pair introduced the motif of sleep and the symbol of the moon; that they represented sobriety and 
order; and that their union provided a contrast to the younger/immature couples. A discussion of the 
dramatic function of the fairies could include the idea that they represent the magical, the dreamlike; their 
intervention in the love affairs of some of the characters advance the plot; they create comedy. The 
actors/clowns provide humour through their handling of classic tragedies and their own dramatic 
production. 
-7- 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and 138 (1.2%) of the 7,059 candidates 
who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. Nine (0.13%) of these candidates earned full 
marks (35). The mean for this question was 17.55. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to describe two ways in which the elements of dream were 
used in the play; Part (b) to discuss the appropriateness of the title of the play; and finally, Part (c), to 
discuss the dramatic functions of dreams in the play. Part (a) tested the candidates‘ knowledge, 
understanding, interpretation and analysis of the concept of dreams in the play. Candidates were expected 
to link the relevance of the title to the play itself. While it was clear that some candidates knew the play 
and interpreted the question well, several had scant knowledge of the text. For those candidates, Part (a) 
lent itself to much narration and Parts (b) and (c) were handled superficially. Acceptable responses to Part 
(c), the most challenging part of the question, included that dreams are the medium by which characters 
are made to perform actions which contribute to the action of the play; dreams are linked to enchantment 
and they propel the action (Puck enchants Lysander and the events that follow); dreams become the 
explanation for strange happenings. 
Fifty-seven (3.06 %) of the 1,865 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Sixteen (0.86%) of these candidates earned full marks. It was noted, however, that more candidates 
scored zero on this question than the others in this section. The mean for the question was 15.18. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the most popular question in the drama section, with slightly over one-third of the 
candidates attempting this question. Part (a) of the question asked for a description of the relationship 
between Miss Aggy and Len (Len the child, not the adult); Part (b), a discussion of Miss Aggy and how 
her character illustrated the challenges of single parenting; and finally Part (c), how the playwright‘s 
dramatic presentation of Miss Aggy evoked different feelings from the audience. Some candidates 
concentrated mainly on Miss Aggy‘s relationship with Len with little or no reference to Len‘s relationship 
with her. Others concentrated on Len, the adult. There was also a tendency to generalize on the struggles 
of single parenting, without much textual reference. Some candidates introduced their own narratives of 
childhood experiences. Part (c) was the most challenging. Some candidates omitted this section and 
others tended to describe how Miss Aggy‘s behaviour made the audience feel. Acceptable responses to 
Part (c) included emotional responses such as, admiration (a single-mother who singlehandedly raised her 
son; a shrewd businesswoman; she sacrificed her life for her boy; she was self-made, independent; 
resentment (the way she manipulates Len; her self-hate; the way she fawned on Pastor Greaves, his 
daughter and ‗light-skinned‘ people) and other responses such as anger, exasperation. The answer lends 
itself to positive and negative emotions. 
One hundred and thirty-three (1.37%) of the 9,723 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30–35. Two (0.02%) candidates earned full marks on this question (35). This question had the 
second highest mean for the section. The mean for this question was 18.11. 
Question 4 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to state the different (opposing) views about beauty; to 
discuss how the playwright used characterization to illustrate those opposing views for Part (b), and 
sought from the candidates their impressions of this presentation (of inner and outer beauty) for Part (c). 
Most candidates seemed to have grasped the concept of beauty explored in the play through the use of
characterization. Although some were able to expound on the presentation of inner and outer beauty, 
-8- 
many were unable to give their final impressions on the play as a whole. Acceptable responses for Part (c) 
covered how the playwright explored some of the assumptions about blackness and inverted some of 
these assumptions to reinforce the idea that outside appearance could be deceiving. 
Thirty-two (3.93%) of the 814 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. No 
candidate earned full marks on this question. However, this question seemed to have resonated well with 
candidates. It had the fewest zeros for the drama section and boasted the highest mean of 18.39. 
Poetry
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were ―Forgive My Guilt‖ and ―Epitaph‖. This question reversed the 
trend in that, for this year it attracted about two-thirds of the responses. Part (a) required candidates to 
describe what happened in each poem as it related to death and memory; Part (b) to say how the speaker 
in each poem reacted to the memory of death; and for Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem 
which effectively portrayed the speaker‘s reaction to the death. Part (a) assessed candidates‘ knowledge 
of the poems by asking them to recall, assess and summarise the information. Most candidates responded 
well to this section. For Part (b), candidates were better able to discuss how the speaker reacted to the 
death in ―Forgive My Guilt‖ (grief, contrition, remorse) than in ―Epitaph.‖ In the latter, candidates 
misinterpreted the anger as indifference, not realizing that even if the death did not evoke public outrage 
at the time, now in the re-telling of the tale; the speaker could experience a kind of displaced anger 
(‗brutal sentences‘).
Part (c) which focused on devices (writer‘s craft) posed a challenge. Both poems were replete with 
similes, metaphors, personification, and imagery. Acceptable responses included appropriate 
identification of devices and such devices should make connections to the reaction to the death. These 
responses showed how each device deepened the remorse; heightened the pain and suffering; contained
the rage; and sustained the storytelling imagery. 
Two hundred and twenty-three (1.79%) of the 12,485 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30–35. Sixteen (0.13%) of these candidates earned full marks (35). The mean for this 
question was 15.32. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose two suitable poems from the 
prescribed list to answer the question set. The question asked candidates to select two appropriate poems 
that focused on the theme of love. Part (a) required candidates to describe who or what is loved; Part (b)
to discuss the effects of this love and finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem which is used 
to portray this love. Part (a) was handled well for the most part, although candidates sometimes did not 
always choose poems that they knew equally well. In this part of the question, candidates were expected 
to name the poems selected, and sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. For Part (b), candidates 
were expected to show how this love reflected, reinforced or questioned the love portrayed. Superior 
discussions mentioned whether this emotional response was wholesome and whether the overall effect 
was positive or negative. 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen to the portrayal of love. Some candidates mentioned but did 
not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify the devices. 
Ninety-five (1.44%) of the 6,616 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Ten candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 15.57. 
-9- 
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in this the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A 
questions which require close individual study of each text and not the comparative treatment of two 
novels as in former years. Songs of Silence did not seem to be a very popular text. The low popularity 
could be attributed to it being a relatively new text on the market with very little critical material available 
for teachers and students. 
Questions 7 and 8 combined were answered by fewer than 8 per cent of candidates who attempted the 
Prose Fiction section. The candidates who attempted questions on this text demonstrated for the most
part, interesting insights. Question 7 asked for a description of the father-child relationships in the 
chapters, ―A Story with No Name‖ and ―Travellers, or Fathers, or Little Fool-Fool,‖ for Part (a); a 
description of the relationship between Cudjoe Man and his daughter for Part (b); and for Part (c ), a 
commentary on what was suggested by the way the writer presented father-child relationships. 
Essentially, candidates focused on the characteristics/qualities of the relationships portrayed by the 
narrator Marlene and her father and for Part (b), a description of the relationship of Cudjoe Man and his 
daughter; essentially the gentle, caring and protective ways in which he ‗mothered‘ his mentally 
handicapped child. 
Part (c) dealt with the narrative techniques of the writer (cued by the word ‗presents‘). Again, this was the 
most challenging part of the question. Acceptable responses dealt with the two chapters and included, 
among others, the ways in which the writer, through Marlene‘s reflections, explores issues such as 
parental infidelity, single parenting, the ways in which the ‗silenced‘ in society (the most vulnerable) are 
treated, the role of fathers in the home, gossip and folklore, the innocent point of view of the young 
narrator, contrasted with the ‗knowledge‘ of the reader, the contrast presented by the naïve Marlene and 
the adult reflecting. 
Ninety-five (8.53%) of the 1,114 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Eight (0.72%) of the candidates scored full marks on the question. The mean for the question was 19.71. 
Question 8 
Parts (a) and (b) asked candidates for a description of what Marlene found strange or confusing in the 
chapters ―The Idiot‖ and ―Morris Hole.‖ Details included Marlene‘s memory of her mother‘s cautionary 
tale about pride (Pa Brown and the river); boys and their inability to spell; her experience with Ezekiel; 
the river and her experiences there; her sexuality (her budding breasts and Miss Retinella‘s insinuation); 
her confused head (―sometimes my head weave stories…‖). 
Part (c) required candidates to discuss two narrative techniques used to heighten the adolescent‘s 
confusion. The narrative techniques include the use of flashbacks, the contrast presented with the innocent 
narrator juxtaposed with the occasional adult interjections/communal voices; use of symbols, imagery and 
elements of song. 
Nineteen (5.57%) of the 341candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. Three 
(0.88%) candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.70. 
-10- 
The Wine of Astonishment
Question 9 
Part (a) sought candidates‘ response to their analysis of the relationship between Bolo and Bee; Bolo as a 
leader (one who cared for the people) and using Bolo (through characterization as a technique) to develop 
the story. For Part (a), some candidates described the characters rather than focused on the analysis of 
the relationship. However, some were insightful in mentioning how both empowered the villagers in 
different ways—Bolo through warrior-hood and Bee, through faith or spirituality. For Part (b), candidates 
tended to concentrate on instances of Bolo‘s interaction with the people rather than Bee‘s thoughts on 
Bolo and how he must have ‗read‘ Bolo‘s actions as ones which were intended to force the villagers to 
reclaim their manhood. 
While most candidates accepted that Bolo was the central character by their responses to Part (c), many 
did not treat this aspect of technique well and as such, resorted to narration. Acceptable responses should 
include Bolo‘s centrality to the novel and what he symbolizes (the traditional way of life); his centrality to 
the internal conflict in the church when he insists on the elimination of Prince; his contribution to the 
excitement and tension with the standoff with the kidnapping of Primus‘ daughters; his links with the 
major and minor characters and the status he shares with Bee. 
One hundred and five (1.33%) of the 7,902 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 
30–35. Five (0.06%) of the candidates scored full marks (35). The mean for this question was 15.14. 
Question 10 
Only 30 per cent of those candidates who attempted questions on this text chose Question 10. Candidates 
did not manage this question well and generally seemed to have a problem with the word ―ritual‖ in Part 
(c). Part (a) required candidates to make the connection that the steelband and the church (in this instance 
the Spiritual Baptist) have the same bond, the retention of African customs. They make use of music, 
singing and movement. Candidates handled Part (b) very well. They were able to grasp the reasons for 
Eva believing that the spirit has deserted the church. Part (c), which required candidates to deal with the 
significance of religious ritual in the novel was done fairly well. Some of the rituals in the novel include 
the rituals associated with the worship—the singing, shouting, dancing, bell-ringing, ‗catching the spirit‘. 
Seven (0.32%) of the 2,180 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. One 
candidate (0.05%) achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 14.24. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
The Short Story section was included in the revised syllabus for this cycle of examinations. This section 
patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, the short stories to be used 
are specified in one question and for the other question candidates choose two appropriate short stories 
from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 are, ―The Day the World Almost Came to an End‖ and 
―Mom Luby and the Social Worker.‖ Almost 60 per cent of the candidates who attempted the short story 
questions did this question. Candidates were asked to describe one humorous incident in each story for 
Part (a); indicate which story they found more interesting, with justification for Part (b); and for Part (c), 
show how the writer creates humour in the telling of these stories. Candidates found Part (a) reasonably 
-11- 
straightforward as they were able to describe a humorous event in each story. A few candidates related 
incidents that were not necessarily humorous. Part (b) sought a comparison with the cue word, ‗more‘ and 
some candidates did not earn full marks for this part of the question because in the discussion, they 
ignored or failed to acknowledge the other story. Part (c) posed a challenge in that candidates tended to 
provide evidence of humour without showing how the humour was created. Candidates are expected to 
discuss the writers‘ craft, for instance, the development of the plot with the rising crescendo and twist, 
which explained the narrator‘s exaggerated response to the booming aircraft in the first story and the use 
of satire to comment on the American welfare system in the other story. 
One hundred and ninety-one (3.46%) of the 5,523 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30–35. Thirteen (0.24%) candidates earned full marks. The mean for this question was 19.37. 
Question 12 
This question concentrated on setting and its contribution to the development of the storyline. Candidates 
were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list. In candidates‘ description of the setting in 
Part (a), many limited their responses to the physical space. However, there were some excellent 
responses, especially from stories such as ―Blackout‖ and ―To Da-Duh, in Memoriam.‖ In responding to 
Part (b), which asked for the significance of the setting to the development of the story, many candidates 
concentrated on the setting and not much on how the setting impacts each story. Part (c) was not handled
well, perhaps because candidates were not as sure about the term ―narrative element‖. Acceptable 
responses discussed elements such as irony, flashback, comparisons, suspense, and dialogue. 
Forty-two (0.09%) of the 2,174 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Two (0.09%) candidates earned full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 16.48. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice 
limits the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer 
the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this is a 
genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs and 
finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students 
to develop the required skills. 
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‗dramatic function‘ and ‗writer‘s craft‘. 
Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected words or 
plotted events for particular effects. 
-12- 
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be 
constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the 
movie version, for instance).
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, 
teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the 
language to describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained 
through listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument 
of the writers‘ style, but is also the ‗lived‘ experience. Literature can help students to explore, 
question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of 
applicability, is what is sometimes captured in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2013 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of 
three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These 
modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each 
question, candidates are required to give approximately five to eight short answers. Twenty marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 60 marks. 
 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to 
study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be 
used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates must 
choose two appropriate poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to 
choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. 
Overall, performance improved compared with that of January 2012. This was the second sitting of 
examinations using the new cycle of texts. It was apparent that candidates were prepared for the
examination using the appropriate texts and so performance showed considerable improvement. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function 
effectively in the passage 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
3 
Compared to last year, candidates‘ performance on Paper 01 showed improvement in all genres. Overall, 
the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 12.35; in Profile 2, Poetry, 9.29; and Profile 3, Prose 
Fiction, 7.74. The weakest performance was in Prose. 
 
Question 1 
This question had the highest mean. The overall mean was 12.35 out of 20. Overall, 3 (0.33 per cent) of 
the 916 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. No candidate scored zero. The extract 
elicited involvement from the candidates and such resonation was demonstrated in their responses to the 
items. 
Part (a) asked candidates for a description of what was happening in lines 1–8, essentially seeking a 
response which covered the persons, place and main event (the stick-fighting competition). This was well 
done. Part (b), however, was not as well done. Although, candidates were aided by the explanatory notes, 
some could not find two pieces of evidence to support the claim that Inez was a ―mature coquette‖. 
Acceptable responses included all the evidence which supported how well versed Inez was in 
manipulating men to get what she wants. For instance, she speaks charmingly to Joe to ―ease up‖ on 
Swifty (―Give him a chance, Joe‖); she gets Swifty to obey her to ―clean up the place.‖ In fact, her 
attempt to charm Joe is so effective that instead of getting him annoyed, he praises her for ―[taking] over 
the business already.‖ 
Part (c) did not present a challenge for most candidates, but some failed to mention that Swifty‘s leaving 
the bar unattended contributed significantly to Joe‘s ire. In response to Part (d), regarding Inez‘s two 
roles, many candidates mentioned her role as mother/nurturer based on Swifty‘s response to her. 
However, other responses included her being peacemaker/mediator and a ‗boss‘ of sorts. 
By far, Part (e) was the most challenging as candidates could not explain the dramatic function of 
Briscoe‘s question. Acceptable responses included to change the subject; to diffuse the tension; and to 
divert Joe‟s attention from further conflict with Swifty. 
For Part (f), most candidates identified the simile as the figurative device, but as usual floundered in 
commenting on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses captured the comparison of the swiftness of the 
stick-fighter, who moved so quickly that this opponent was not aware of the coming blow until he felt it. 
Part (g) allowed candidates to demonstrate their creativity in suggesting the title and justifying it. A few 
however, presented titles without textual evidence, and thus lost marks. Candidates need to remember that 
reader-response items are always text based. 
Question 2 
Overall, 4 (0.44 per cent) of the 916 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. Two 
candidates (0.22 per cent) scored zero. The overall mean for this question was 9.29. 
Part (a) asked candidates to identify the main event (concert/contest/talent show) and its location (school). 
Most candidates were able to score full marks on this question. Although Part (b) was handled reasonably 
well, some candidates identified the incorrect stanza. Candidates were asked to select a line or phrase 
from the first stanza which describes Brother Kinsley‘s outstanding quality and comment on its 
effectiveness. Phrases included: ―swiftest legs”; “like sharpened blades”; “cutting through the finishing 
tape lines”. All these emphasized his prowess, his superior quality; in essence, how quickly, gracefully 
and efficiently he could run races. 
4 
Part (c) required candidates to describe the speaker‘s attitude to Brother Kingsley and to support their 
response with evidence from lines 9 to12. Many candidates merely mentioned admiration for his dancing 
and many failed to manipulate textual evidence to earn maximum marks. Acceptable responses included 
the way in which his graceful, effortless movements connected earth and air. 
Some candidates hinted at but did not give full treatment to responses in Part (d), which asked for an 
example of contrast and a comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses included: Brother 
Kingsley‟s dancing versus the girl‟s singing (effective because of the stark difference between Kingsley‟s 
talents and popularity against the girl‟s grating, despised rendition which emphasized the unfairness of 
the judge); the entire school versus Miss Stirling‟s judgment OR the symbol of the school versus 
repression OR the booing by all versus Miss Stirling‟s single voice. Any variation of these is effective 
because the contrast underscores the unfair and undemocratic nature of the judging. 
For Part (e), candidates were required to comment on one of the three quotations given. Some candidates 
disregarded the rubric and responded to all three, instead of commenting on one of the three given. Any of 
the following responses would have earned full marks: 
 ―he affected a clutching movement‖ is used to suggest that Brother Kingley‘s action was not 
willful but merely imitative; 
 ―dull unburnished memory gem‖ is used to suggest that the girl‘s performance lacked spectacle, it 
was ordinary; 
 ―a drooping slipper-satin/christian-quattie dress‖ suggests ill-fitting, ordinary, cheap and boringly 
correct attire. 
For Part (f) (i), candidates were required to identify the line where the persona‘s tone changed. Most 
candidates were able to understand the change in tone though some failed to identify the correct line. Part 
(f) (ii) required candidates to explain how the tone changes. Many candidates who attempted the second 
part of the question gave why the tone changed, rather than how the tone changed. The latter was required 
in order to earn full marks. Acceptable responses for the change in tone, Part (a), were line 16, “till he
affected a clutching movement”, and line 18, “Miss Stirling judged that move”. For Part (b), an 
acceptable response is: the tone changed from celebration/admiration to disappointment/a sense of 
grievance. 
Part (g) required candidates to comment on the appropriateness of the title. Some candidates did not 
appear to interpret this question well and presented instead, their own title for the poem. Candidates were 
expected to use textual evidence and respond to the key word concert as in celebration of talent but in this 
instance sarcastically entitled because of the outcome OR a communal condemnation, as in the students 
acting as one to expose Miss Stirling‘s judgement. Essentially, candidates were expected to respond to the 
effectiveness of the word, in light of the poem. 
Question 3 
Overall, the prose question generated the lowest mean (7.74). Candidates did not, for the most part, 
demonstrate a convincing understanding of the passage, especially in areas which required higher order 
comprehension skills. Candidates must attempt all the parts of the question so as to score the highest 
marks possible. In this section, in particular, some candidates did not do all the parts. No candidate scored 
full marks in this section and three (0.33 per cent) of the 916 candidates scored zero. 
Part (a) which asked for a description of the setting was done well. Most candidates were able to earn two 
of the three marks for this question. Acceptable responses included a description of the street/lane, rum 
bar, sea and twilight. 
5 
Part (b) required candidates to use evidence from paragraphs 2 and 3 to describe the relationship between 
Leila and Millie. While candidates were able to mention the girls were friends, many did not refer to the 
evidence from paragraphs 2 and 3 in their responses. Evidence from these paragraphs point to, the girls 
support/trust each other; Millie is the more aggressive/Leila is the more timid. 
For Part (c), candidates were required to comment on one of the quotations given. Some attempted the 
two, instead of one. Again, there was the tendency to explain or paraphrase. Acceptable responses for ―in 
the distance the sun slipped…‖ included those that paid attention to lonely and cold as these words 
seemed to define the relationship; the reinforcement of the relationship/situation through pathetic fallacy; 
the suddenness of night. For ―the smoky noises…‖, acceptable responses included the almost muted 
sounds from inside, merged with the smoke, seeped outside; the heightened contrast of inside/outside; the 
animal-like atmosphere of the inside is contrasted with the colder/cleaner environment occupied by the 
females. 
For Part (d) (i), candidates were required to identify one instance when either Millie or Bradeth was 
sarcastic. Part (d) (ii) required candidates to explain how the example shows sarcasm. Although 
candidates were able to identify the sarcasm in Part (d) (i), the explanation for Part (d) (ii) fell short. 
Some candidates ignored the instructions and supplied responses for both Bradeth and Millie, instead of 
Bradeth or Millie. An acceptable response for Bradeth included: ―check out what a bit of peace and quiet 
feel like, but it‘s not looking like we going to finish the test”. This is a sideswipe/veiled statement that the 
women were a nuisance, preventing the men from enjoying their rest. Another sarcastic remark was 
Bradeth‘s ―a long time now” and by repeating it, he is in fact ‗throwing words‘ at Millie, suggesting 
slyly, that she is the cause of his headache. 
Acceptable responses for Millie included: “You both have a nice sleep, then?” in tone which is 
suggesting, the very opposite. Her use of ―nice‖ is mocking; she hopes they had rotten sleep, and further, 
she disapproves of their sleeping in the first place. Her other remark, ―well now that the testing done” is 
sarcastic in that her pseudo-polite phrasing (―maybe you don‘t mind”) is really a kind of cover for the 
violence of ―testing your backside up to Sandy Bay”. 
Part (e), which asked candidates to suggest two impressions of the men and use evidence to support these
impressions, was fairly well done. However, like many of the questions candidates scored better in one 
part of the question. Candidates scored in mentioning that the men were friends/drinking buddies but 
many did not use the evidence which would allow them to score full marks. Acceptable responses 
included details which supported the fact that they seem to prefer their own company to that of the ladies 
(their controlling/nagging girlfriends); they were unreliable, having stood up the ladies. 
Part (f) was not well done. Candidates were required to suggest one reason why Aunt Toosie may want to 
talk to Bradeth and to justify their response. Candidates missed the inference and could not find 
supporting evidence. Some thought that Bradeth had done a literal test or felt that Aunt Toosie had not 
seen him for a very long time. Acceptable responses included: Aunt Toosie wanted to ask Bradeth about 
his intentions towards her niece; Bradeth may have a different view about the relationship and may be 
hesitant to commit to it; or Bradeth may not be as focused on the relationship as Millie. Marks were also 
awarded if candidates mentioned that Aunt Toosie wanted to talk to him about the drinking. 
Candidates did not appear to be very confident in responding to Part (g). This part of the question 
required candidates to list the sequential points of tension and explain how each point causes the tension 
to rise. Some candidates merely mentioned a point or two with no mention of how each contributed to the 
other. Acceptable responses included: the girls walking purposefully to an unfamiliar street; seeing their 
men lying drunken from a distance; tension building as Leila feels uncomfortable for having encouraged 
Millie to waste time waiting for the men; Millie‟s forceful action of pushing Bradeth away from her; her 
6 
posture, aggression and sarcasm which heighten the tension, plus Bradeth‟s pointed rejoinders, his 
stance (“hind legs first”), like an animal at bay climaxes the tension. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01 
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of style. It 
is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at 
meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the ‗performance‘ element of the genre. 
 Teachers could assist students to dramatize sections of plays in class — dramatize scenes and 
summarize scenes to encourage recall. 
 Teachers are encouraged to assist students in understanding the rubric of examinations and ensure 
that they do only what is asked. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to 
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgements, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgements in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Of the 12 questions in Paper 02, 6 (50 per cent) had candidates earning full marks. Less than 20 per cent 
of the candidates attempted Questions 4, 8, 10 and 12. Question 4, one of the questions on drama 
achieved the highest mean (19.17); the second highest mean was also from the drama questions: Question 
2 with a mean of 18.18. The lowest mean came from Prose Fiction, Question 7, with a mean of 12.03. 
Question 9 on The Wine of Astonishment was the most popular question, with more than 50 per cent of 
candidates attempting it. 
7 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
For Question 1, candidates were required to use evidence from Act 2 Scene1 to support the description 
that (a) Puck was a ―shrewd and knavish sprite‖; (b) describe how his actions cause confusion in the 
magic wood and (c) discuss Puck‘s dramatic function in the play. For Part (a), some candidates had 
difficulty recalling the scene. Acceptable responses included details which captured Puck‟s delight in 
doing mischief to humans and animals (frightening village maidens; skimming off the cream from the 
milk; tricking stallions/colts into thinking there is a filly nearby to name a few). Although some 
candidates listed/mentioned some of Puck‘s actions in the magic wood, responses to Part (b) lacked 
development. Acceptable responses included: he mistakenly enchants Lysander instead of Demetrius and 
Lysander awakes madly in love with Helena and scornful of Hermia; Oberon orders him to make matters 
right and he enchants Demetrius and this causes both men to declare their love for Helena, much to 
Hermia‟s consternation and anger. That same night Puck puts the ass‟ head on Bottom, causing the 
mechanicals to panic and scamper away. 
Part (c) which required a discussion of Puck‘s dramatic function was not handled well. Acceptable 
responses included: the comic humour by his words and actions; his intentional creation of comedy 
(under Oberon‟s orders) of Titania falling in love with an ass; he links the three worlds of the play; he 
closes the play by reminding the audience that they did but slumber and so reinforces the idea that the 
play is an illusion; thus returns the audience to reality. 
The mean for this question is 17.86 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Question 2 
Four couples were listed for candidates to choose one and for Part (a), to describe the personality 
differences between the male and female; Part (b) to describe one situation in which these differences 
were demonstrated and finally, Part (c) to discuss the way in which Shakespeare dramatizes these 
differences. Candidates managed Part (a) reasonably well, in that they were able to grasp that the men 
appeared to be domineering, authoritative, selfish and abusive; whereas the women tended to be 
passionate, accepting, headstrong, gentle and capable of love. Part (b), however, proved somewhat 
challenging in that candidates sometimes were not able to relate the characteristics of the characters with 
the situations. 
Acceptable responses for Part (c) included Shakespeare‘s use of conflict situations as a means of 
dramatizing the differences or contrasts. The use of enchantment (physical and psychological 
transformations as male partners struggle to retain or obtain power over females) and props (for example,
Bottom‘s ass‘ head as part of Oberon‘s attempt to dominate Titania). 
The mean for this question was 18.18 out of a total of 35 marks. 
The following are some recommendations that will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean 
texts and drama as a whole: 
 Teachers/instructors should find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even 
minor ones).
 Candidates should dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Teachers/instructors should identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations and 
discussion of scenes/excerpts. 
8 
 Candidates should practise Part (c) of drama questions, which target the language and 
application of drama. 
 Teachers/instructors should use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic 
techniques work. 
 Teachers/instructors should prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic 
techniques. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
For Part (a), candidates were asked to describe what was happening in Act 1 Scene 1; for Part (b) to 
discuss Miss Aggy‘s understanding of ambition and advancement and finally, for Part (c) to show how 
Rhone explores the ideas of ambition and advancement in the play. Although candidates were asked to 
give the details of the first scene in the play, many had challenges recalling the major incident (Len‘s 
beating because he was caught playing with Pearl by the river, and not at home studying) and a few 
candidates did not correctly identify Miss Aggy‘s relationship to Len. Acceptable responses for Part (b) 
covered Miss Aggy‘s self-hate and her dream of the light-skinned Margaret as the ultimate prize for her 
son (the epitome of advancement and ambition). 
Part (c), which focused on the writer‘s craft proved challenging for many candidates. Acceptable 
responses for Part (c) included the ways in which Rhone allows his audience to see a more balanced view 
of ambition and advancement than what Miss Aggy offers by using Pa Ben as storyteller and character to 
comment on and draw attention to Miss Aggy‟s actions; Pa Ben‟s role as mentor and confidante in 
fostering the relationship between Len and Lois (“the pretty black girl”); using Len and Lois as another 
alternative to Miss Aggy‟s bias, showing that ambition and advancement can come through the black 
middle class; using dramatic irony, contrast and flashback to interrogate Miss Aggy‟s anti-black stance. 
Costuming, props and visual imagery are also used to explore the idea of ambition and advancement. 
The mean for this question was 17.97 out of a total of 35. 
Question 4 
This question registered the highest mean for Paper 02 (19.17). Using the stem, Rhone‟s presentation of 
his characters is what makes this story worth telling, this question asked candidates for Part (a), to
describe two characters they find appealing; for Part (b), to show how one of these characters has his/her 
story to tell and Part (c), to discuss how the character named in Part (b) contributes to suspense in the 
play. Candidates managed Parts (a) and (b) reasonably well, perhaps because these parts were ‗open‘ 
enough for personal interaction. The suspense aspect of the question posed a challenge. Acceptable 
responses included a discussion on how the character selected impacted the drama/story through tension, 
resolution of the conflict, enhancement of the theme(s), and advancement of the plot. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
Part (a) required candidates to describe what was taking place in A Stone‟s Throw and The Woman Speaks 
to the Man Who Has Employed Her son in terms of how women are treated. Candidates had reasonable 
knowledge of the poems (although a few mentioned, wrongly, that the woman was raped by the mob in 
the first poem). Part (b) required candidates to discuss the speaker‘s attitude to the woman in each poem. 
In articulating the speaker‘s attitude acceptable responses for A Stone‟s Throw included the self-righteous, 
9 
smug, haughty and narrow-mindedness of the speakers (men) in their behaviour to exact judgment. The 
speaker in The Woman Speaks to the Man Who Has Employed Her Son is voiced through the concerns of 
a mother in the third-person narrative, who appears to be at the mercy of the don. She, however, has other 
and inner powers to draw on for strength and support as she faces the daunting task of her son‘s imminent 
violent end. 
Part (c) continues to be challenging to candidates. Candidates were asked to identify and comment on 
one poetic device used to explore the treatment of women. Acceptable responses included the use of 
biblical allusions, metaphor, irony, sarcasm, contrast, among others. Many candidates did not lose sight 
of the significance of the biblical allusions in the poems. In A Stone‟s Throw references to ―guru”, ―God￾merchant‖, and the title (―he that is without sin, cast the first stone‖) invoke ideas of supernatural 
intervention on the woman‘s behalf, as the rescuer stands alone against a blood-thirsty mob; hypocrisy 
exposed as no one could stone the woman and generally, the fate of women and their unequal status in 
terms of sexual indiscretion. In The Woman Speaks to the Man Who Has Employed Her Son references to 
Judas Iscariot‘s mother, the father giving gifts (Jesus‘ parable), and the thief on the cross all allude to 
relationships in families, betrayal and death, sin and consequences. 
The treatment of women is seen also through the use of contrast: the mob versus the guru; the scared 
woman versus the blood-thirsty men; the woman versus the man who employed her son. These all 
demonstrate the imbalance of power. 
The mean for this question was 15.28 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name that focus on a significant experience or 
event. Part (a) asked candidates to describe the experience or event; Part (b), to discuss the speaker‘s 
attitude to this experience or event and Part (c), to discuss one device that is used to present this 
experience or event. 
All poems on the syllabus could have been used. Part (c) was as usual, the most challenging as most 
candidates were not able to discuss the effectiveness of the poetic device to present this experience or 
event (even when correctly identified). The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in some 
instances only one device was identified. If this is to be acceptable, candidates must show its effectiveness 
(textually) in both poems. In order to gain full marks, candidates must correctly identify each device, 
show how it is used to portray the event or experience and make a statement of comparison between the 
two poems. 
Here is an example from a candidate who did a fairly good job of showing the effectiveness of a device 
by tying it to the experience/event (in this instance discrimination/racism in the poem ―Dreaming Black 
Boy‖): 
The constant repetition of „I wish‟ illustrates the longing and desire the persona has for 
oppression and blatant discrimination to stop. It is a symbol of grief as he feels helpless to the 
fact that he is oppressed by the white society. The phrase „I wish‟ is far-fetched and may not 
happen. Therefore, it is evident he thinks discrimination against African-Americans would not 
stop. By extension the phrase „I wish‟ reminds us of the famous speech made by civil rights 
activist Martin Luther King Jr which entailed the phrase „I have a dream.‟
The mean for this question was 17.69 out of a total of 35 marks. 
10
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
This was not a popular choice among candidates as less than 4 per cent of the 916 candidates attempted 
this question. The stem read: Songs of Silence is held together by the sure and simple voice of a child but 
interspersed with the voices of adult reflection. Candidates were asked for Part (a), to describe two 
incidents that Marlene the child observes OR experiences in the chapter Effita; for Part (b), to discuss how 
that chapter highlights that the story is being told from a child‘s point of view and finally, for Part (c), to 
discuss how Forbes mixes childhood and adult voices in the novel. Many candidates could not recall the 
details of the chapter and many confused Auntie Sare and Effita. Acceptable responses for Part (a) 
included how Auntie Sare was sustained by the community; Marlene‟s Sunday ritual of taking food to her 
and enduring her long and personal prayers; Effie, the community wailer and the incident in which she 
made the wrong pronouncement. 
Acceptable responses to Part (b) included the fact that the narrator declared that she was nine years old; 
her childish fascination with Auntie Sare‟s prayers; declaring that Auntie Sare was “older than forever”; 
the childish wonder in which Effie‟s actions are captured; repeating phrases from her mother and her 
constant questioning of the inadequacy of her mother‟s responses and generally, her living in „fear‟ of 
her mother. 
Implicit in this part of the question is the writer‘s technique. A few candidates hinted at but did not 
discuss with conviction the elements of Part (c). Acceptable responses to this part included: using 
Marlene as the child narrator or as the adult reflecting through the consciousness of a child; using 
various tones in Marlene‟s voice, for example, language registers (from the Standard to the non￾Standard); using voices of other adult villagers to comment on social issues; using folklore and 
juxtaposing the young naïve Marlene with the adult who looks back. 
The mean for this question was 12.03 out of a total of 35. 
Question 8 
This question was the least popular. Less than 1 per cent of the 916 candidates attempted it. The stimulus 
read: In spite of her insightfulness, Marlene, even as an adult, was still confused by some relationships. 
Candidates were required for Part (a), to describe two instances of Marlene‘s insightfulness in the chapter 
―So Few and Such Morning Songs‘; for Part (b) to describe two instances of Marlene‘s confusion in the 
chapter ―A Story with No Name‖; and for Part (c), to discuss one device that Forbes uses to portray 
insight and confusion in the novel. 
Candidates did not demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the text in order to describe two instances of 
Marlene‘s insightfulness in the chapter ―So Few and Such Morning Songs‖ or her confusion in ―A Story 
With No Name‖. Candidates also did not demonstrate sufficient facility with narrative techniques to 
respond to the final part of the question which asked for one device used to portray insight and confusion 
in the novel. Acceptable responses included: the narrative structure itself which tends to reflect Marlene‟s 
random wanderings; the narrator‟s „head‟ becomes the site of wandering as well („my head don‟t work 
straight…sometimes my head weave stories‟); stories do not support chronological development; 
symbolism, as in silence and the ways in which silence confuses or clarifies issues. 
The mean for this question was 12.33 out of a total of 35. 
11
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
This question was the most popular, garnering more than 50 per cent of candidates‘ responses. The 
stimulus read: ―I want you people to be against me”, Bolo says and his voice, Bee tell me, was a terrible 
cry. ―I want you to be my enemy. I want you to come and take these girls from me”. For Part (a), 
candidates were required to describe the situation in which Bolo poses this challenge; for Part (b), to 
discuss why Bolo would challenge the villagers in this way and for Part (c), to show how Lovelace 
presents the tension between the community and Bolo in the novel. 
Clearly the Bolo/Bee dynamics resonated with candidates and many were familiar with the text. For Part 
(a), candidates were fairly conversant with the issue of Bolo‘s abduction of Primus‘ daughters, Bee‘s role 
in trying to resolve the issue and Bolo‘s defiance of the entire village. Part (b), which asked for the reason 
for Bolo‘s challenging of the villagers was not lost on candidates who discussed Bolo‘s passion in waging 
his one-man war against the men in the village to regain their manhood. Part (c) which dealt with the 
writer‘s presentation of the tension between the community and Bolo was also managed well. Acceptable 
responses included: Bolo‟s challenging of Bee‟s decision to obey the law and stop shouting; Bolo‟s return 
from prison and turning into a bully and the reasons for this; the abduction of Primus‟ daughters; 
through elements such as contrast, figurative devices and symbols. 
The mean for this question was 15.33 out of a total of 35. 
Question 10 
The stimulus for this question read: Eulalie is a marginal, forgotten character in The Wine of 
Astonishment. For Part (a) candidates were required to describe Eulalie; for Part(b), to explain her role in 
the novel and for Part (c), to discuss Lovelace‘s treatment of women in the novel.
Superior responses demonstrated knowledge of Eulalie‘s symbolic role in relation to the Bonasse 
community, whereas weak responses demonstrated limited knowledge of this ‗marginal‘ character. A 
brief description of her yields her being the village belle and future wife of Bolo, only to be taken and 
used by the returning Ivan Morton. Although some candidates had challenges with the word role in Part 
(b), some rightly saw her as the personification of beauty and innocence in the village; she was Ivan‘s 
first ‗victim‘ from the village; her ‗violation‘ must have affected Bolo, whose pride would not allow him 
now to have her. 
Part (c) which asked for the writer‘s treatment of women in the novel, had responses which primarily 
featured Eva, the narrator and matriarch. Other responses included the fact that women are generally 
marginalized; they are victims of the male world. 
The mean for this question was 15.52 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Short stories 
Candidates are asked to prepare ten short stories for this section. Of the 916 candidates attempting the 
Prose Fiction profile 37 per cent attempted the question on short stories. No candidate attained full marks 
for these questions. As with the Poetry, this section contains Type B (comparative) questions. Generally, 
candidates were not conversant with some of the stories. In some instances, only one of the stories was 
studied sufficiently with the other, a mere passing acquaintance. Consequently, candidates lost marks as 
they launched into story telling or repeating of information to ‗pad‘ their responses. 
12
A World of Prose 
Question 11 
―Septimus‖ and ―Emma‖ were used to demonstrate how children and adults see the world with the 
suggested bias that readers preferred the children‘s perspective of the world. Part (a) required candidates 
to provide an outline of the views held by the children; Part (b) required an explanation of the adults‘ 
views on the matter and Part (c) required candidates to say which view is preferred with (textual) 
justification. 
The children in ―Septimus” collectively endorse the view of their parents that everything in the family 
must be shared: the children play together; ‗own‘ the street together and as Septimus would later learn, 
share the goodies together. In ―Emma” the children want to be spontaneous, unpretentious and not full of 
adult restrictions when they grow up. The adults, however, (as in the adult Septimus‘ delight in having an 
entire apple for himself and in ―Emma‖ with the adult play of deceit, betrayal and hypocrisy) tend to have 
opposite views to that of the children. 
Candidates for Part (c) exercised their reader-response skills although some did not base their responses 
too much on textual evidence. There was the tendency here to support the issues with their own narratives 
and this tended to divert their attention from the onus to keep to the ‗facts‘ of the stories. Justification 
requires textual responsibility. 
The mean for this question was 15.06 out of a total of 35 marks. 
 
Question 12 
Referring to the stories ―Shabine‖ and ―Blackout” in the context of ambiguity in malefemale 
relationships, candidates were asked in Part (a), to describe one malefemale relationship presented in 
each story and for Part (b), to show how the ambiguity is presented in each of these relationships and 
finally for Part (c), to discuss one theme that each writer portrays through these relationships. 
Able candidates described the narrator‘s secret fascination with Justine in spite of his grandmother‘s 
warnings (since he is her social superior). The brief bus-stop encounter of the black man and the white 
woman and the stereotypical assumptions form the basis of the relationship in ―Blackout.‖ 
Part (b) proved challenging to some candidates as they had problems understanding the word ambiguity. 
Acceptable responses for ―Shabine” included: the privileged male admirer sees Justine as a seductress 
and appears to be blind to the communal rejection of her; they both desire each other but lack the will to 
take the leap from admiration to action. The norms of North American culture (segregation and racist 
responses) evident in the subtle actions of the woman and the nationalistic pride juxtaposed with strong 
sense of equality affirmed by the West Indian black man in “Blackout” reflect the tension and ambiguities 
the story explores. 
Candidates were able to choose from a range of themes (racial intolerance, gender issues, class, inhibited 
love, black/white relationships) and some were able to apply them to the stories under discussion. 
The mean for this question was 14.14 out of a total of 35 marks. 
13
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, 
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 11–12 (Prose Fiction, Short Stories). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the discrete nature 
of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for students to sharpen their essay￾writing skills.
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of texts, 
for example, websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Attention must be paid to all parts of the question. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and 
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
Candidates need to be reminded that June 2012 was the beginning of the new cycle of texts to be studied 
and examined (with this 2013 being the first January sitting). Knowledge of the revised syllabus is 
necessary. 
For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative questions are those set on the Short Stories
(Questions 11 and 12). All other prose questions are on single texts. Candidates need to select the 
appropriate texts from the revised syllabus in order to be adequately prepared for the examinations. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2013 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one on each 
mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles 
which form the basis for candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of sub-parts that 
require candidates to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for 
each question, for a total of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from each section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this 
section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one 
of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the 
second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which they have 
studied from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and 
the two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the 
poetry section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires 
candidates to choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how 
effectively these elements function in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
-3- 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 
2011–2013: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for the Period 2011–2013 
Paper 01 2011
(%)
2012
(%)
2013
(%)
DRAMA 68.13 60.30 54.25 
POETRY 55.46 53.70 57.95 
PROSE 53.93 50.60 59.40 
Unlike the past years, candidates’ performance Drama declined while there was improvement this 
year in the other two genres. 
Question 1: Drama
Overall, 199 (0.98%) of the 20,318 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) asked candidates to refer to lines 1–4 of the dramatic extract and identify Nora’s state of 
mind, supporting their response with one stage direction and one other piece of evidence. Although 
candidates were able to identify Nora’s state of mind (she was sad/upset), many confused stage 
directions with textual evidence. Some identified two stage directions. Acceptable textual evidence 
included: “Oh really! Trying to frighten me!” and “But—No, that’s impossible!” (line 3). 
 
Candidates were asked to explain the dramatic function of the children in Part (b). Acceptable 
responses went beyond describing the children to explaining how their presence impacted Nora and 
even the audience. Thus, the children’s presence reinforces Nora’s maternal qualities (she is kind and 
gentle with them); their presence also reinforces her inner turmoil and the audience senses conflict 
when she admonishes them not to mention the ‘strange man’ who was at the house. 
Part (c) did not pose a challenge to candidates as many were able to comment on the Christmas tree as 
prop. Quite correctly, they mentioned that the tree hinted at setting (time of year, that is, Christmas 
time) and that it acted as a kind of diversion from the tension/conflict. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to use lines 23–26 to state their impression of Nora, with 
supporting evidence. Two marks were awarded for the impression and one mark for the supporting 
evidence. Two general impressions anticipated were that Nora is a multi-faceted woman/her life is 
busy and she will do whatever it takes to preserve her marriage. Candidates demonstrated a general 
knowledge of Nora’s character but lacked the vocabulary required to respond adequately to the 
question posed. They were able to describe the tasks Nora did but fell short in terms of using those 
ideas to form an impression or a conclusion. 
Candidates experienced difficulty stating one contradiction shown in Nora’s character, which was 
required for Part (e), although they managed to find evidential support in some instances. Embedded 
in the contradiction is Nora’s two-sidedness – the devoted wife and mother and the mother who 
encourages her children to lie; the good home-maker who cannot settle on any task or get a chance to 
do so and the loving wife who lies to her husband. 
-4- 
For Part (f), candidates were asked to explain the dramatic function of Helmer’s entrance. Many 
candidates realized the significance of the entrance but far too many could not use the literary 
language to bolster their response. Acceptable responses included: breaking/heightening the tension; 
adding to the suspense; breaking Nora’s train of thought.
Candidates displayed creativity and imagination in their responses to Part (g), which required them to 
imagine being Nora and use evidence from the extract to suggest how they wanted the audience to 
respond to them. 
Four thousand three hundred and fifty-three that is approximately 19 per cent of the 20,318 candidates 
who attempted Question 1 earned marks between 15 and 20. The mean for this question was 10.85 out 
of 20. This was the lowest mean achieved of the three genres tested. 
Question 2 
One hundred and eighty-three (0.90 %) of the 20,343 candidates who attempted this question scored 
full marks. 
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying the phrase (‘almost forgotten my dream’/ ‘my 
dream’) that captured the main idea in lines 1–6. 
Part (b) required candidates to identify the device in line 5 (simile) and comment on its effectiveness. 
The speaker compares the dream to the sun, a symbol of hope, life and possibilities. Most were able to 
identify the device and some gave reasonable responses regarding the effectiveness. 
Part (c) required candidates to discuss the effect of the repeated word (‘rose’) in lines 7, 8 and 11. 
Acceptable responses mentioned the development of the notion of progression and or entrapment. 
Thus, the magnification of the wall (representing obstacles) and the way in which the word ‘rose’
ends line 7 and begins line 8, present the encirclement or entrapment of the speaker. 
Part (d) (i) required candidates to identify the speaker’s tone in lines 1–12 
(reflective/nostalgic/conversational) and lines 20–29 (militant/determined/strident) and (d) (ii) 
required them to comment on the appropriateness of the change. Candidates were able to note the 
difference in tone at the beginning of the poem and towards the end. However, the discussion fell 
short in terms of why this change was appropriate. Acceptable responses captured the hope embodied 
in the dream at the outset, then the wall and finally the need to encourage himself to overcome the 
challenges in order to liberate himself. 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to state what was suggested by the use of “shadow,” “wall,” and 
“night” in (i) and for (ii), show how “dream,” “sun,” and “light” were opposed to (i). This was 
challenging to many candidates who interpreted the words in (i) in the very literal sense of a 
nightmare that the speaker was experiencing while he was asleep. Consequently, the words “dream,” 
“sun,” and “light” were erroneously interpreted as morning which brings sunlight, or the persona 
awakening from an unpleasant dream. Full marks were awarded to candidates who mentioned that the 
second set of words suggests hope and that the first set of words suggests entrapment and a strong 
sense of being unable to overcome obstacles. 
Most candidates managed to respond appropriately to Part (f), which asked for an explanation of line 
24: “Help me to shatter this darkness”. The speaker recognizes that he is in a state of defeat and 
pleads for assistance (perhaps from a higher power) to destroy this oppressive darkness or wall. 
Most candidates did exceptionally well on part (g), both in providing another title for the poem and 
using text-based evidence to justify their choice. Some responses included the idea that the title 
heightened the persona’s struggle to recapture what was lost; that it focused on the persona’s past and
that it encouraged reflection or introspection. 
-5- 
Five thousand, four hundred and sixteen (approximately 21%) of the 20,343 candidates who 
attempted this question earned marks between 15 and 20. The mean for this question was 11.59 out of 
20. 
Question 3 
The mean score (11.88) on Prose Fiction was the highest of the three genres. Four thousand six 
hundred and twenty-one (approximately 19%) of the 20,319 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 15 and 20. Eighteen (0.09%) candidates earned the full marks out of 20. 
Most candidates had a fair sense of what the passage was about and were able to answer Part (a) 
which asked for an outline of the passage. Acceptable responses took into account the fact that the old 
man had caught no fish; the concern of the boy and the old man’s disposition/strength. 
Part (b) required from candidates an identification of the mood in the first paragraph 
(despair/hopelessness/sadness) and to provide supporting evidence from the passage. Candidates had 
little difficulty with evidence from the passage. Some lost marks as evidential support given was not 
confined to the first paragraph. 
Characterization appeared to be understood by candidates. Part (c), which asked for two aspects of the 
boy’s character, with supporting evidence, was well handled. Any two of these character traits were 
acceptable: caring, compassionate, dutiful, and obedient. Candidates cited evidence such as the boy’s 
helpfulness in carrying the old man’s fishing and sailing gear; his being sorry for the old man; and 
that he reluctantly obeyed his parents’ command to leave the old man. 
Although candidates correctly identified the device in Part (d) as simile, they had challenges in 
commenting on its effectiveness. Some struggled with an explanation and commented that because a 
desert is a dry place, the simile is ineffective since it is no place for fishes to live. However, the 
effectiveness lies in its literary not literal meaning: a desert conjures up images of absence (of food 
and water); the landscape of a desert tends to be bleak and ravaged and this image is connected to the 
old man—nature’s harsh, enduring, unproductive (fishless) landscape. 
For Part (e), two marks were awarded for the effect created by the detailed description of the old man 
in paragraph 2, and one mark awarded for justification. Acceptable responses included how he was 
initially presented as thin and gaunt but as the paragraph developed he is seen as physically strong.
 
Part (f) asked candidates to explain why they might find the impression created by the final paragraph 
unexpected. Acceptable responses indicated the difference between what the reader expected based on 
the information given in the first paragraph as against what was presented in the final paragraph. 
Structurally, the final paragraph is the shortest. It ends with the refusal to be defeated; it testifies to the 
old man’s inner strength (evident in his eyes), unlike the other paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Teachers are encouraged to continue working with students to hone their skills in appreciating and 
responding to literature. In the examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a 
careful reading of the evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the 
strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events 
described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some students 
use in their responses to the questions.
-6- 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations 
and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, 
bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the 
critical and creative thinking that the study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, 
poems and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of 
consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday
living
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various 
sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques 
in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviou). This skill is 
tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular 
text
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature. 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Questions 1 and 2, which are set on the Shakespeare text A Midsummer Night’s Dream, attracted 
almost one-half of the total responses for the drama section. Question 1 was more popular than 
Question 2, and was attempted by more than half of the candidates. 
 
This question sought to elicit from candidates, a discussion on male dominance in the play. Part (a) 
asked for an outline of two situations in which such issues occur; Part (b) required a discussion of 
how women deal with the identified situations and Part (c), a discussion of one dramatic technique 
that Shakespeare uses to present the issue of male dominance. Candidates demonstrated familiarity 
with the theme of male dominance and were able to use male/female relationships relating to 
daughters and lovers to discuss Part (a) and use examples of Hermia, Titania and Helena for the 
discussion in Part (b). A few candidates referred to the mechanicals (the all-male cast) and lost marks 
here. Part (c) however, proved the most challenging in terms of identification of the technique and 
discussion of its function. Weak candidates repeated and narrated the theme of male female 
relationships in the play. In some instances, dramatic irony was named but arguing its relevance was 
not convincing. Accepted responses include plot development, characterization (comparison and 
contrast), use of suspense and dramatic tension. 
-7- 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and 142 (2.13%) of the 6,554 
candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 35. Two (0.03%) of these 
candidates earned full marks (35). The mean for this question was 17.31. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to outline the situation that caused Helena’s accusation of 
Hermia in Act III Scene 2, from which the quotation came; Part (b) asked for a description of the 
aspects of the personalities of Helena and Hermia that were brought out in this exchange and Part (c), 
a discussion of Shakespeare’s presentation of friendship in the play. 
Generally, candidates failed to recall this particular incident accurately. Some were able, to some 
degree, to identify the incident in the forest triggered by Puck’s inadvertent enchantment of Lysander 
and the consequences, required in Part (a). Candidates were also able to note the similarities and 
differences in these women. Predictably, Part (c) which sought to discuss the presentation of
friendship, (which really is a discussion of the how) was the most challenging. Candidates tended to 
recount what happened in the play without drawing meaningful conclusions about friendship (what is 
suggested). Typical responses to this part of the question were literal. Few candidates were able to 
discuss the different ideas about friendship that were suggested and or identify how techniques such 
as contrast, irony, and characterization were used to highlight issues about friendship. 
Seventy-eight (2.28 %) of the 1,822 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Eight (0.44%) of these candidates earned full marks. The mean for the question was 16.24. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the most popular question in the drama section. Part (a) asked for a description of 
what was happening (in reference to the quotation from Act I, Scene 1); Part (b), a discussion of Miss 
Aggy’s idea of the perfect wife for Len and finally, Part (c), a discussion of how the playwright’s 
dramatic presentation of black/white relationships is a powerful aspect of this play. 
Though both incidents have to do with women of whom Miss Aggy disapproved, many candidates 
referred to the river incident with Pearl and Len (instead of the photograph incident) for Part (a). 
Acceptable responses described Miss Aggy receiving a letter from Len which included a picture of his 
wife Lois, her rage and rejection of Lois and Pa Ben’s advice. Most candidates handled Part (b), 
which asked for Miss Aggy’s idea of a perfect wife for Len, quite well. Part (c) required a broader 
treatment than a description of black and (near)-white characters. Discussion should relate to the play 
as a whole, in terms of Rhone’s presentation of black/white relationships. Acceptable responses for 
this part of the question included major characters and what they represent; interrogations of 
whiteness as good and black as bad or evil; the ways in which the play can be making social 
commentaries in terms of value systems, dramatic irony (inversions of roles). 
Four hundred and sixty-seven (4%) of the 11,980 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30 and 35. Eight (0.07%) candidates earned full marks of 35 on this question. The 
mean for this question was 18.92, which was the second highest mean for a question in this section. 
-8- 
Question 4 
This was the least popular question on this paper, as only 250 candidates attempted it. 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to outline the situation that caused Pa Ben to make 
the comment quoted in Act II, Scene 3. Many could not remember the incident (Len’s visit to Pa 
Ben’s house in a bid to save Lois from his mother’s harm). Part (b) asked for a discussion of two of 
the three listed cultural practices (story telling, church going and belief in the supernatural). Even 
though prompts were provided in the wording of the question, many could not see these folk forms as 
dramatic technique. Part (c) asked candidates to comment on two themes brought out by these 
presentations. Acceptable responses included, (but were not limited to) history, or the past, religion, 
culture, identity, race, and class. 
 
Two of the 96 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 35. No candidate 
earned full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 13.82. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were, “It is the Constant Image of Your Face” and “Dreaming Black 
Boy”. Slightly more than half of the candidates attempted this question. Part (a) required candidates 
to outline the hopes and desires portrayed in each poem; Part (b) asked for a discussion of the poem 
found to be more appealing; and for Part (c) the task was to discuss one device from each poem which 
portrayed hopes or desires. 
Part (a) assessed candidates’ knowledge of the poems by asking them to recall, assess and summarise 
the information. Although candidates were more knowledgeable about “Dreaming Black Boy”, most 
responded well to this part of the question. The personal, yet text-based responses, provided for Part
(b) were refreshing and informative. Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft),
posed a challenge for many candidates. In many instances devices were mentioned but the discussion 
was vague and lacked textual support. Many did not link the device with hopes or desires. Acceptable 
responses included appropriate identification of devices and such devices and establishment of the 
connection between such devices and the hopes or desires. 
Words that were commonly misspelt included repetition, racism and prejudice 
Fourteen hundred and forty-four (approximately 14%) of the 10,304 candidates who attempted this 
question earned marks between 30 and 35. Fifty-four (0.52%) of these candidates earned the full 
mark of 35. The mean for this question was 20.13. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose from the prescribed list two 
poems that focused on the theme of conflict to answer the question set. Any relevant poems could be 
used but popular choices were, “Forgive My Guilt”, “Once Upon a Time”, “The Woman Speaks to 
the Man who Has Employed her Son.”, “This is the Dark Time, My Love”, “Dulce et Decorum Est” 
and “Epitaph” . Part (a) required candidates to describe this conflict (whether external or internal); 
Part (b) asked candidates to comment on how the conflict is treated or addressed in each poem and 
finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem which is used to explore this conflict. 
Part (a) was handled well for the most part. In this part of the question, candidates were expected to 
name the poems selected but sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. For Part (b), some 
candidates had difficulty with the word “comment” as they thought it meant solving the conflict. 
-9- 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of conflict. Some candidates 
mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify the devices and 
treated the discussion as a continuation of Part (b). 
Four hundred and forty-five (approximately 5%) of the 9,617 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 30 and 35. Twenty-one candidates scored full marks on this question. The 
mean for this question was 16.80. 
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A 
questions. These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the comparative 
treatment of two novels. Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular although for this sitting: the 
number of candidates attempting the questions set on this text increased marginally. 
Many of the candidates who attempted questions on this text demonstrated interesting insights. Part 
(a) of Question 7 asked for an outline of two of these three chapters: “The Idiot,” “Miss Minnie” and 
“Morris Hole”. Part (b) asked for a discussion of how the writer presents the confusion in the 
adolescent’s world in the chapters selected in (a); and for Part (c), a justification of the chapter which 
is more appealing. 
 
Many candidates went beyond the level of “outline” in Part (a) while others went to the extreme of 
storytelling. A few candidates misread the rubric and commented on all three chapters. Candidates’ 
ability to organize and summarise significant events in the chapters was the main skill tested. 
Candidates found Part (b) challenging in that they did not deal with the writer’s presentation of 
confusion as some neither identified nor discussed a technique. Acceptable responses included the use 
of proverbs and the story of Marlene’s mother and Pa Brown to frame her relationship with Ezekiel; 
relying on village gossip to explain strange incidents; the episodic, staccato-like collage of images
and/experiences mirroring the confusion in Marlene’s mind; the use of imagery, dreams and the river.
 
Part (c) was primarily reader-response, (with the requisite textual justification). Candidates managed 
reasonably well as they demonstrated familiarity with the text. 
One hundred and nine (9.9%) of the 1,041 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30 and 35. Six candidates scored full marks on the question. The mean for the question was 
21.57. 
Question 8 
By referring to two characters in the novel, Question 8 asked for a discussion of the statement, 
“Forbes presents silence as a refuge in the novel Songs of Silence.” Many candidates identified 
suitable characters who portray silence, for example, Paul’s mother in ‘A Story with No Name’, 
Marlene the narrator, and other characters such as Miss Minnie, Effita, Nathan and Little Fool Fool. 
Candidates were also conversant with the concept of silence as refuge. For candidates to have gained 
maximum marks there needed to have been stronger identification and discussion of 
devices/techniques to present the many nuanced silences in the text. Acceptable responses included 
symbolism; interplay between what is said and what is not; and contrast and comparison. 
Forty-eight (5.15%) of the 912 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 
35. One candidate scored full marks. The mean for this question was 19.38. 
-10- 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
Twice the number of candidates attempted this question, compared with the number attempting
Question 10. Part (a) asked candidates to trace the rise of Ivan Morton; Part (b), a comparison 
between the leadership style of Ivan and Bee and Part (c) required an analysis of the ways in which 
the tension between Ivan and Bee dramatise the clash between the old ways and the new. 
For Part (a), many candidates gave details about Ivan without showing how he developed. By missing 
the concept of trace, candidates ignored the chronological element embedded in the task (many did 
not even mention Ivan the boy). Because the text is not chronologically sequenced, this might be part 
of the challenge faced by candidates. For Part (b), candidates were knowledgeable about the 
leadership styles but the details supplied sometimes were not germane to the question. In some 
instances, candidates did not draw inferences from details given. For example, when Ivan moved into 
the Richardson’s house, what did his actions suggest? How might that inform his leadership? Part (c) 
was handled commendably. Candidates saw the tension represented by these men in terms of the old 
ways (tradition, roots, the folk) and any threat to that way of life. Many were sensitive to the tension 
portrayed in the comparison, the writer’s use of suspense and many candidates mentioned the near 
explosive scene when Ivan told Bee that his people could “act white” as a means to survive. 
One hundred and seventy-four (2.59%) of the 6,582 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30 and 35. Three candidates scored full marks of 35. The mean for this question was 
16.62. 
Question 10 
Referring to Bee telling Eva, “I going to break this law,” candidates were asked to discuss the ways in 
which the Wine of Astonishment explores the idea of resistance and rebellion. Although weaker 
candidates resorted to storytelling, the idea of resistance resonated well with candidates as there was 
little difficulty identifying incidents and characters involved. Some candidates listed points (as with 
pros and cons) a practice that is not encouraged. In some instances, candidates lacked the vocabulary 
to express themselves and knowledge and usage of certain words (as in passive, active, non-violent, 
non-insurrectionary, retaliate), which could have helped. Additionally, candidates lacked awareness 
of basic historical fundamentals about the plot, such as (the American presence in Trinidad at that 
time). Popular responses included the collective resistance of the church led by Bee and the 
Bolo/Prince confrontation. 
Forty-eight (1.44%) of the 3,186 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Two candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question
was 15.33. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
The Short Story section patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, 
the short stories to be used are specified in one question, while for the other question; candidates 
choose two appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were, “Blackout” and “To Da-duh, in Memoriam.” It 
asked candidates to make the connection between setting and plot. Candidates were asked to describe 
the setting of each story in Part (a). Part (b) offered options for the candidate to show how the writer 
used descriptive language or dialogue or contrast to develop the story. Part (c) asked for an 
explanation of the significance of setting in the development of each story. 
-11- 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward. Some candidates disregarded the rubric for Part 
(b) and discussed more than one technique. Acceptable responses for this part included the use of 
descriptive language to evoke mood; description of landscape; dialogue to reinforce attitudes and; 
perceptions; and contrast (from the perspective of character, setting, intentions). 
Part (c) posed a challenge in that candidates displayed limited knowledge of the significance of setting 
to the development of the story. Acceptable responses included the ways in which the setting (as in 
“Blackout”) provides the background and reasons and attitudes of the positions taken by the two 
characters (the sense of superiority of the woman as against the nationalistic pride of the man). The 
two settings in “To Da-duh, in Memoriam” become the representation of the two main characters 
(rural Barbados and cosmopolitan New York) and the conflict between native tropical elements and
the modernizing effect of the metropolis. 
Here is an example of a good response to Part (c):
The white woman is in mental darkness and fails to see the ‘light’ that the man is showing her that all 
men are created equal. In the end, it is not he who needs to take a ‘light’ from her (cigarette or 
otherwise) it is she who must take a ‘light’ (knowledge and acceptance) from him. Also, in ‘To Da￾Duh in Memoriam’, the story starts off with the narrator not being able to see, as the airport is dark 
and somewhat crowded, obscuring her view. She eventually sees Da-Duh, as she is standing in the 
light in her white dress and trying to find her way to them. Similarly, the [narrator] was in ‘darkness’ 
thinking that her world of technology was all there was, and was better, only to come to Barbados 
and see the flaws in her lifestyle and the emptiness of it…setting is significant in both stories and the 
‘darkness’ can be taken both literally and symbolically as it represents the need for some kind of 
‘light’ in order to see clearly. 
Twenty-four (0.67%) of the 3,410 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. One candidate earned the full mark of 35. The mean for this question was 14.49. 
Question 12 
In this question candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list and in Part (a), 
to describe the love relationship portrayed in the two stories: Part (b) asked for a discussion of how 
the attitudes displayed by two characters affect the outcome of the relationship and Part (c), an 
identification of and commentary on one device used by the writer to convey his/her view of the 
relationship. Some candidates lost marks because they included inappropriate texts (such as poems, 
drama texts and novels). Apart from naming and discussing devices, candidates generally 
demonstrated a degree of weakness in writing the comparative essay. 
Eighty-four (1.68%) of the 4,973 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Two candidates earned full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 15.79. 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
On the whole, many essays were well structured, coherent and cohesive. Teachers should be 
commended for their hard work. However, more attention needs to be given to the acquisition of 
knowledge of literary terms and dramatic techniques, the ability to discuss their use by the playwright 
and to comment on their effectiveness. We urge teachers/instructors to continue to emphasize and 
recognize genre-specific terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness. 
-12- 
1. Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of preparation for the 
examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short stories) limits the depth of the 
discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to 
answer the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as 
this is a genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken 
the analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs
and finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker 
students to develop the required skills.
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‘dramatic function’ and ‘writer’s 
craft’. Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected 
words or plotted events for particular effects.
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be 
constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not 
the film version, for instance). 
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, describe, 
determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by dedicating time to closely 
examining the nature of the response expected by each of these and other key words used in 
questions. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, 
teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the 
language to describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and 
gained through listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an 
instrument of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to 
explore, question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, 
the kind of applicability, is what sometimes emerged in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
 EXAMINATION 
JANUARY 2014 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) examination in English B consists of 
two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, 
one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are 
the content profiles which form the basis for candidates’ assessment. In each question, 
candidates are required to give approximately five to eight short answers. Twenty marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 60 marks. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on 
specific texts. Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. 
Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the 
questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the 
second question, Question 6, candidates must choose two appropriate poems from which they 
have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question from 
this section. 
Section C, Prose Fiction, consists of six questions. The two novels (Questions 7–10) are Type A 
questions. The short story consists of Type B questions. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. 
Of the 12 questions on this paper, five had candidates earning full marks. Prose (Question 11) 
achieved the highest mean (22.41); the second highest mean was from Drama (Question 2 with a 
mean of 19.69). The lowest mean came from Prose (Question 8) with a mean of 7.92 out of a 
total of 35 marks for each question. 
3 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills: 
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a 
given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props. 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive. 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters. 
Compared with 2013, candidates’ performance on Paper 01 showed improvement in the Poetry 
and Prose Fiction profiles. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 9.69; in 
Profile 2, Poetry, 10.73; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 8.03. The weakest performance was in 
Prose Fiction. 
 
Question 1 (Drama) 
This question had the lowest mean. For Part (a), many candidates misinterpreted aspects and 
gave responses which merely stated the familial relationship between the two men 
(uncle/nephew). Acceptable responses should (keeping to lines 1–10) focus on the character 
traits of the men, for example, Petu was authoritative and authoritarian whereas Ato, the nephew 
being submissive, deferred readily to Petu’s commands. Part (b) asked for two functions served 
by the stage directions starting from line 10 and ending at line 20. Some candidates restated the 
stage directions whereas others responded appropriately to include the following: they serve to 
inform the audience that time has elapsed; that Ato wastes no time in obeying Petu; that time has 
elapsed since Ato’s appearance and disappearance; and that Eulalie’s smoking and drinking 
reflect her attitude to the community’s traditions. 
Again the word aspects in Part (c) appeared to be problematic to candidates. Instead of focusing 
on the nature of the relationship between the couple, candidates provided ‘surface’ responses that 
essentially restated factual information from the extract, such as, Ato and Eulalie were married. 
4 
Some candidates did not provide sufficient justification for the aspects of the relationship 
identified, whereas some identified aspects with no justification. Acceptable responses should 
take into account the fact that the couple is still very much in love with each other (they still can 
share a joke and they have private names for each other). Also, Ato is protective of her (advising 
her not to drink too much). 
In response to Part (d), although candidates understood what the question demanded, some 
responses were not as comprehensive and comments were mainly made about Eulalie’s drinking 
and smoking. Responses should also include her disgust and resistance to the traditions of her 
husband’s family.
Candidates were comfortable with Part (e) which dealt with tension and gave acceptable 
responses such as the tension intensifies towards the end because the playwright increased the 
tempo of the action by the shortened lines of dialogue, increased use of stage directions and the 
use of questions. 
Part (f) allowed candidates to demonstrate their creativity in suggesting the title and justifying it. 
A few however, presented titles without textual evidence, and thus lost marks. Others ‘lifted’ 
words from the extract such as “taboo”, “Ato” and “Eulalie” without critical application. 
Candidates need to remember that reader-response items are always text-based. 
Question 2 (Poetry) 
Most candidates earned full marks for Part (a) which asked for three things about the bayou (a 
place of mystery, habitat for frogs and grasshoppers, mossy). 
Apart from mentioning the mystery, many candidates could not show how stanza 1 was 
connected to stanza 2. Acceptable responses for Part (b) should include the following: stanza 1 
introduces the idea of the allure of buried or sunken pirate treasure, while stanza 2 seems to take 
the reader on a treasure-hunting expedition where travellers seem to enter a world “dripping in 
mystery”; stanza 2 further develops the mystery introduced in stanza 1 by suggesting that beyond 
buried treasure, there might be even some live, dangerous creatures lurking beneath the surface. 
Although candidates were able to identify the device in stanza 2 that Part (c) required them to 
provide, many failed at explaining the effectiveness. Acceptable responses of the device 
included, personification/metaphor (“the bayou sweats”); metaphor/imagery (“dripping in 
mystery”); and imagery appealing to sight (“murky”) and sound (“hushed in secrecy”). All 
devices point to the idea of a heightening of the tension/excitement surrounding the bayou’s 
hidden and perhaps dangerous secrets. 
5 
For Part (d), candidates gave vague responses and the word impressions appeared to have been a 
challenge. Acceptable responses should indicate that the impression is created that mortal 
danger lurks in the bayou and this can come from any of the creatures/monsters which can grip, 
clench, snap and hold. 
Most candidates gave reasonable responses to Part (e) and mentioned the use of phrases like, 
holds a mystery, movements unknown, dripping in mystery to suggest the notion that the person 
is viewing the bayou from a distance. For Part (f), candidates tended to view stanza 4 in isolation 
and therefore missed how it is connected to the poem as a whole. Acceptable responses should 
mention how it reinforces the idea of mystery and danger to those who venture in it; “guardian 
trees” which suggest that the vegetation serves to protect its secrets from intruders; the image of 
the empty canoe drifting suggests that the human occupant(s) has/have been destroyed by the 
bayou or the creatures there — a general reinforcement of danger throughout the poem. 
Some candidates did not exercise creativity in Part (g). However, others gave acceptable 
responses in describing and substantiating the mystery—there is a monster in the water; there is 
no danger but a feeling of dread created by the atmosphere and vegetation. 
Question 3 (Prose) 
Candidates performed satisfactorily on Part (a) which asked for two reasons for Amabelle’s visit 
to Kongo (to ask his approval for the elder to visit him to talk about Joel’s accident and to make 
an offer to pay for Joel’s funeral). However, many failed to be specific in their responses, 
providing vague or incorrect assumptions as their answers. For instance, many stated that 
Amabelle visited Kongo because she wanted to ask him something or she sought to tell him that 
the elder wanted to see him, suggesting then that Kongo was being summoned by the elder, 
rather than the elder wishing to visit him. 
For Part (b), candidates were also able to provide the two versions of Joel’s death as presented in 
the extract — accident and homicide. Many scored full marks on this item. For Part (c), some 
candidates were able to accurately identify Kongo’s feelings (grief/sorrow) and that his over￾emphasized actions disguised his emotions (for example, digging flour from his fingernails and 
taking snuff to steady himself). 
For Part (d), candidates were able, for the most part, to identify the simile and a few gave 
reasonable responses about its effectiveness. However, many candidates merely explained what 
weeds are/do. Those who responded appropriately, mentioned Joel being one with nature or his 
being independent/self-reliant, bringing out the notion that weeds need very little, if any, special 
treatment to flourish. Candidates found Part (e) quite challenging. Generally they could not 
explain what was ironical in the way Joel was buried. Many commented on the fact that he was 
6 
buried naked. Candidates could not make the link between the father giving Joel a ceremonial 
burial and a typical ceremonial burial. Ideally, candidates were expected to note that all the 
trappings of a ‘decent’ burial were removed yet his father’s description of the burial ritual made 
Joel into a kind of cosmic royalty. 
Some candidates knew what was required for Part (f) but lacked the literary language to express 
themselves. Essentially, Kongo’s measured, controlled, simple and affectionate choice of 
words/expressions seem extraordinary, heroic and regal. His tendency to repeat reinforces his 
sense of loss but also (especially when he repeats “my son”) shows grief, pride and affection. 
Part (g) asked to state what was suggested in line 26 (“Tell him I am a man….He was a man, too, 
my son.”). Many candidates only captured the fact that his refusal of financial aid for the burial 
of his son suggests he is independent and missed the opportunity to suggest that Kongo believes 
that he needs to be treated with respect regardless of his position. 
Recommendations 
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of 
style. It is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving 
at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the ‘performance’ element of the genre. They need to focus some more on the 
dramatic function of stage directions. 
 Teachers could help students to dramatize sections of plays in class, dramatize scenes and 
summarize them to encourage recall. 
 Teachers are encouraged to assist students in understanding the rubric of examinations so 
that they do only what is asked. 
7 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions 
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 23 of the 
syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and 
plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of 
consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday 
living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis 
(the ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from 
various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, 
analytical responses …and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various 
techniques in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). 
This skill is tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
For Question 1, candidates were asked to describe the challenges faced by one of these couples: 
Lysander and Hermia or Demetrius and Helena before their wedding. Part (b) asked for a 
description of how the challenges identified in Part (a) are resolved and Part (c), Shakespeare’s 
use of the couples’ experience to demonstrate that marriage is an important social institution. 
Although some candidates resorted to narration of the couples’ stories, many identified 
appropriate challenges, for instance, Egeus’ objections to Lysander and his insistence that 
8 
Hermia marry Demetrius; under the enchantment Lysander professes love to Helena and rejects 
Hermia; Egeus supporting the idea that Demetrius should be Helena’s husband or generally, 
society’s patriarchal laws and their impact on these couples. 
Part (b) was also reasonably attempted. Part (c) however, posed a challenge as many candidates 
were not able to make the link that Shakespeare’s dramatic presentation of marriage forms part 
of the climax. This part of the question asked candidates to show how Shakespeare uses the 
couples’ experience to demonstrate that marriage is an important social institution. This implicit 
use of technique (via the marriages) is a typical feature of comedies and candidates missed this. 
Generally, candidates tended to speak more about love than marriage, missing the point that the 
marriages offer resolution and consolidation, thus endorsing the notion that it is worthwhile and 
desirable. 
The mean for this question was 17.94. 
Question 2 
Candidates handled this question better than Question 1. Part (a) asked for a description of one 
of the incidents which occurs in the magic wood and Part (b), a discussion of the outcome of this 
incident. Part (c) asked for an examination of how this incident relates to the title of the play. 
Although few candidates narrated, most confined their discussion to the woods. For Part (a), 
acceptable responses included the consequences of Oberon’s malice and Puck’s enchantment. 
Part (b) was not handled well as some candidates could not separate the incident from the 
outcome and in cases where the outcome was mentioned, it was not discussed. Acceptable 
responses included the ways in which Puck ‘re-enchants’ the enchanted ones back to the right 
ways of seeing or the ways in which the illusion is removed so characters are back to normal. 
Relating the incident to the title (as was asked for in Part (c)) was handled fairly well. Even 
responses that were weak in Parts (a) and (b), scored well here as candidates were able to explore 
issues such as magic, dream, the fantastical and the suspension of reality. 
The mean for this question was 19.69. 
Recommendations 
A few recommendations that will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean texts (and 
drama as a whole) are given below. 
 Teachers should find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even the minor 
scenes). 
9 
 Students should be encouraged to dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Teachers should ask students to identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations. 
 More practice is needed with regard to the Part (c) of drama questions, which tend to 
target the language and application of drama. 
 Teachers should use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic techniques 
work. 
 Teachers should prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic 
techniques. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
The thematic concern of this question was family relationships. Part (a) asked for Lois’ role in 
the play; Part (b), a discussion of one instance of conflict involving Lois and Part (c), an 
examination of two ways in which Rhone resolves conflict in the play. Candidates tended to 
discuss the play rather than concentrate on Lois’ role. Inaccuracies such as Lois being male, her 
being confused with the character Miss Aggy (Mama) and misrepresenting other texts were 
noted. Acceptable responses for Part (a) dealt with Lois’ pivotal role as wife, daughter, 
daughter-in-law and professional and the ways in which she is connected to Len, Miss Aggy and 
George. In terms of conflict, as required in Part (b), candidates were expected to choose one 
instance in the play where this was evident. Candidates did better in this part as they were able to 
identify and discuss instances such as when Miss Aggy sees her photograph and the 
consequences; any other physical encounter (as in her mother-in-law’s visits); the blackmailing 
incident with George or even when she accuses Len of being cold and insensitive. 
For Part (c), many candidates described instead of examined the two ways in which the conflict 
was resolved. Some concentrated on one conflict instead of two. Acceptable responses included 
dramatic irony, contrast, symbolism (as in the ending of the play) and the use of Pa Ben as 
character/storyteller in his role as mediator. Others concentrated on the ways in which the 
characters solved their own conflict and not the ways in which the playwright did, which 
essentially evaded the playwright’s craft. 
The mean for this question was 16.78. 
 
10
Question 4 
This question earned the lowest mean for the drama section. Candidates were expected to 
describe one instance when the audience was reminded that the play has its roots in the past (Part 
(a)). Acceptable responses for this aspect included the rural setting for the storytelling; 
references to 60 years ago; the type of housing (wattle and daub); the king’s head on stamps and 
monetary currency. Part (b) asked for a discussion of one way in which flashbacks are used to 
reinforce the idea of past events. Candidates were expected to mention for instance, Lois as the 
bank teller and being blackmailed by her boss George; Len’s humiliation at school at the hands 
of George and his peers. Candidates fared better in Part (c) which asked for a discussion of one 
theme highlighted by the playwright’s treatment of the past. Submissions such as family 
relationships, cultural practice, gender, power relationships, colour and class were acceptable. 
The mean for this question was 15.67. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The two named poems for this question were “Dulce et Decorum Est” and “This is the Dark 
Time, My Love”. Part (a) required candidates to describe the suffering presented in each poem. 
They were better able to describe the suffering in “Dulce et Decorum Est”, perhaps because of its 
overtly physical nature. Candidates did not always capture the emotional/mental suffering in the 
latter poem. For Part (b), candidates correctly identified and named the device used to portray the 
suffering but many could not sustain the discussion (that is, keeping it to the theme of human 
suffering). Part (c), which asked candidates to use the title of each poem to discuss the poem they 
found more effective in portraying human suffering, posed some challenges as well. Although 
this part of the question allowed for personal choice and discretion, candidates were expected to 
apply the content and craft to their personal responses. 
The mean for this question was 13.39. 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name, which focus on relationships. 
Although some candidates did not use poems in this cycle and others used inappropriate texts (as 
in non-poetry), many selected appropriate poems for this question. However, details to support 
the theme of relationships were not always sustained, for example, in “Orchids”. A popular and 
well-handled poem was “God’s Grandeur” which portrays mankind’s relationship with the 
environment. A few lesser known poems were not handled confidently, for example, “South”, 
11
“Theme for English B” and “West Indies, USA”. Part (a) asked candidates to describe the 
relationship. Part (b) asked for a discussion of devices used to explore the relationship in each 
poem. The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in some instances, only one device 
was identified. If this is to be acceptable, the candidates must show its effectiveness (textually) in 
both poems. In order to gain full marks, candidates must correctly identify each device, show 
how it is used to portray the relationship and make a statement of comparison between the two 
poems. 
For Part (c), candidates were asked to discuss the relationship they found more appealing. Many 
did not refer to the other poem or suggest how they came to prefer the poem being discussed. 
Those who handled this section well concentrated on relationships involving man/nature; 
teacher/student; parent/child. For this section, application and poem selection posed challenges. 
Discussions were unbalanced because candidates did not always know both poems well enough 
for the application needed. 
Prose Fiction 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The questions set on the two novels (Questions 7–10) are 
Type A questions. The questions set on the short story consist of Type B questions. Candidates 
were required to answer one question from this section. 
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
This was not a popular choice among candidates. Responses were sparse and superficial. There 
were instances of inaccuracies and personal invention. Very few candidates were sufficiently 
aware of the text and its nuances. For Part (a), candidates were asked to discuss the relationship 
between these characters — Longman and Marlene’s mother and the Lady with no name and 
Marlene’s father. For Part (b), candidates were required to explain what limits the narrator from 
telling the whole story of these relationships. For Part (c), candidates were asked to show how 
the way the story is told contributes to the fascination. The relationships involving Marlene’s 
parents are clouded with uncertainties and candidates for Part (a) were expected to describe what 
appeared to be unusual about these relationships, for instance, Marlene’s observation that when 
the traveller (Longman) stopped or stayed, her mother was exceptionally joyful and would break 
out into singing; the incident of Marlene seeing her father giving fish to the no name lady and his 
stern warning for her not to mention it and the ways in which she became suspicious and 
speculative. 
12
Acceptable responses to Part (b) included, the fact that the narrator’s mother outlines what 
issues belong to the world of adults and that of children; the role of village gossip, superstition 
and rumour; and generally, the limitations of a child narrator, using the first person point of 
view. 
Implicit in this part of the question is the writer’s technique. A few candidates hinted at but did 
not discuss with conviction the elements of Part (c), which really should concentrate on how the 
story is told. Acceptable responses to this part of the question included: using Marlene as the 
child narrator (in a sense, the eyes of a child); the loyal, trusting daughter speculating on the 
marital relationships of her parents; the ways in which the blanks are filled; the interaction of 
the adult or outside perspective on the issues and the role of irony and intrigue. 
The mean for this question was 10.54. 
Question 8 
This was an open-ended question in which candidates were to discuss the two ways of viewing 
the text — as a cohesive whole or as a collection of separate short stories. Acceptable responses 
for the whole text view would entail the fact that Marlene is the single narrator throughout; the 
setting is typically the same rural village; Marlene’s family members appear in the stories and 
that the symbols, and images of the river, silence and colours are seen in the text. For the view of 
the short story, the idea that the stories are self-sustaining; the themes changing; the main 
characters can ‘stand alone’; separate chapter titles and the varying perspectives (from the 
communal to the intensely personal) are all points that may be used. 
The mean for this question was 7.92, the lowest for this paper. 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
This question focused on the roles played by the minor characters Primus and Buntin. Part (a) 
asked for a description of an incident in which either Primus or Buntin plays a meaningful role; 
Part (b) asked candidates to comment on this character’s role in the novel and Part (c), for a 
discussion of the male villagers as a group in the novel. Although it appeared that the word 
meaningful posed a challenge, generally, Primus was the more popular choice for Part (a). Many 
cited the Bolo/Primus standoff and the few who chose Buntin, mentioned his shop being the 
meeting place for the community. Those who chose Buntin often did not recognize that for Part 
(b), he was also part of the awakening of the consciousness of the community and black people 
generally. Although candidates mentioned the activities at his shop, they did not take the 
13
discussion much further. For Part (c), candidates tended to describe what the men did but did not 
so much see how they functioned as a group in terms of their being protectors, guardians of the 
traditions (for example, stick fighting), restorers of order and providers. 
The mean for this question was 19.69. 
Question 10 
This open-ended question asked candidates to look at both sides of Bolo. It was the preferred 
choice although some candidates resorted to storytelling or discussed only one side of Bolo. 
Superior candidates showed both sides of the argument — Bolo the warrior and community￾builder and Bolo the ‘bad john’ who degenerates when the community lacked the courage to 
support his values. 
The mean for this question was 15.97. 
Short Stories 
A World of Prose 
Question 11 
“Berry” and “The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream” were used to discuss the issue of injustice. Part 
(a) asked for an outline of each story; Part (b), a description of the injustice in each story and Part 
(c), a discussion of the narrator the candidate thinks contributes more to his/her understanding of 
injustice. Candidates knew the stories and managed Part (a) quite well. The issue of injustice 
resonated with them and they had strong views about racism, parent/child relationships and 
matters of infidelity. These enabled them to form their own views. What a few lacked for Part (c) 
was showing how their own experiences are shaped by the characters’ experience of injustice. 
Additionally, some candidates did not mention the impact of writer’s craft, as in the omniscient 
narrator’s perspective as a means of getting into the hearts and minds of the characters. 
The mean for this question was 22.41, the highest overall. 
Question 12 
Candidates were asked to refer to two stories studied from their prescribed text and, for Part (a), 
to describe a memorable event or incident in the stories; for Part (b), to comment on one 
character’s reaction to the events or incidents in the stories and for Part ( c), to show how the 
writer keeps the reader interested in the stories. Common choices were “Emma”, “Blackout”, 
14
“Shabine” and “The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream”. Part (b) proved to be the most challenging as 
candidates tended to narrate before getting to the essential material required for the response. 
Some candidates recognized writer’s craft that was necessary to do justice to Part (c) and 
mentioned the child narrator and the use of flashback. 
The mean for this question was 16.71. 
Recommendations 
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, 
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 11–12 (Prose Fiction, Short Stories). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the 
discrete nature of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for students to sharpen their 
essay-writing skills. Modelling is essential. Attention must be paid to all parts of the 
question. 
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of 
texts, for example, websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and 
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
Candidates are reminded that January 2015 will be the end of this cycle and hence this cycle of 
texts. A new cycle of texts will be used for June 2015. 
For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative questions are those set on the Short 
Stories (Questions 11 and 12). All other prose questions are on single texts. Candidates need to 
select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus in order to be adequately prepared for the 
examinations. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2014 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright© 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one on each mode 
of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form 
the basis for candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of sub-parts that require candidates 
to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for each question, for a total 
of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which correspond to 
the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from each 
section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparative analysis of aspects of two poems. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are 
specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified in the 
question. However, for the other, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which 
they have studied on the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to choose 
the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills: 
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how effectively these 
elements function in the passage 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
-3- 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 2012–
2014: 
Mean Scores by Profile: Paper 01, 2012–2014 
(Expressed as Percentage of Profile Maximum Score) 
Paper 01 2012 2013 2014
DRAMA 53.64 52.45 56.08
POETRY 46.76 53.82 48.82
PROSE 48.06 50.51 48.43
Candidates’ performance declined in Poetry and Prose. 
Question 1: Drama 
Eighty-six (0.43%) of the 20,104 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) asked candidates to refer to lines 1–4 of the dramatic extract and state what they learnt about Tyrone 
and Mary. Acceptable responses included, Mary and Tyrone are playful/affectionate; Tyrone flatters Mary or
Mary falls for the flattery which seems to transform her. Candidates did well on this question. 
Candidates were asked to state Tyrone’s intention at the beginning of the extract (lines 1–6) for Part (b). 
Acceptable responses included, Tyrone’s intention is to cheer her up or Tyrone’s intention is to distract her 
from what seems to be bothering her. Apart from a few candidates who used similar responses for Parts (a) and 
(b), candidates responded fairly well on this question. 
Part (c) asked candidates what was suggested by Mary’s exclamation, “Right in front of Jamie!” Acceptable 
responses included any of the following: 
 It suggests that she is embarrassed by the affection shown to her in the presence of her son 
 It suggest that they are not normally this affectionate in front of their son; Mary is a coy woman 
 Mary is a shy woman who does not like displays of conjugal affection in front of others 
 Mary is very straight-laced about matters of (sexual) love. 
Most candidates, were able to earn at least some of the 3 marks allocated to this question. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to justify whether Mary was really “fishing for compliments” as in 
lines 8–9. One mark was awarded for the position taken and two marks, for the justification. The flexibility 
of the reader-response element allowed candidates to score in this part as they were allowed to agree or disagree. 
Examples of acceptable responses were as follows: No, Mary is not fishing for compliments. She appears to be 
a senior person and really may have trouble with her eyes; or yes, she is fishing for compliments as she can 
always depend on her husband and son to make her feel better (and stop her from worrying about Edmund). 
Candidates experienced difficulty with Part (e), which asked them to comment on the use of any one of the 
stage directions in presenting Mary’s state of mind from lines 29–42. Most were able to identify and explain 
the stage directions; however, many did not comment on the playwright’s use of the stage directions to 
present Mary’s state of mind. Some candidates also had difficulty with identifying both aspects of Mary’s 
state of mind. Many focused on the fact that she was worried/concerned, and did not recognize that there 
were changes in her state of mind. Acceptable responses captured the following: 
-4- 
The playwright effectively uses the stage directions to establish that Mary seems to be quite agitated or 
distracted. He does this by using the stage directions to show the sudden changes in her mood or mood 
swings (“She laughs…she changes to a brisk business air” and “she sighs with humorous 
exaggeration…she goes to the parlour, then turns, her face worried again”). It seems as though she tries 
to shake off what is disturbing her but it very quickly seems to overcome her. The stage directions show 
the contrasting actions which are an indication of her state of mind. 
For Part (f), candidates were asked to explain the effect that Edmund has on the performance on stage. 
Many candidates did not earn the full four marks on this part and gave superficial responses such as, 
“Edmund adds suspense to the audience.” Acceptable responses should include some of these ideas: 
 
Edmund is not on stage. Yet, all the actions and even emotions displayed on stage are centred on him. 
Mary seems to be distracted and worried because of his illness. Her inconsistent actions seem to be 
because of his illness. Her husband’s actions toward his wife are also directed by Edmund or his illness. 
She seems to have become a “ghost of the dead” and his actions on stage are geared towards bringing 
her back to her former self by helping her not to focus on Edmund’s condition. This is evident in his
exclamation. “You’re a fine lunkhead! Haven’t you any sense? The one thing to avoid is saying anything 
that would get her more upset over Edmund”.
For Part (g), candidates were asked to show how Jamie’s comment, “you can see she’s deliberately fooling 
herself with all that summer cold talk” might affect the audience. This was not handled well. Acceptable 
responses included: 
Jamie’s comment at the end of the extract answers many of the questions that the audience has had about 
the action on stage. The reason for Mary’s state of mind is confirmed. Her husband’s actions are also 
explained. The audience will therefore understand that his actions are quite justified given the situation 
where it seems that Edmund could die. The audience may also feel a great deal of compassion for Mary 
as well as for Tyrone as his wife’s physical appearance, health, and state of mind seem to have 
deteriorated and he seems to be unable to help her, though he tries. 
The mean for this question was 10.81 out of 20. This was the highest mean achieved for the three genres 
tested. 
Question 2 
Thirty-two (0.16 %) of the 20,102 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying where (on a train) and when (at night) the event is 
taking place. The second portion of Part (a) asked candidates to say in what way the speaker was different 
from those around him. Candidates had no difficulty in stating that the speaker was alert/awake while the 
others were sleeping. 
Part (b) required candidates to state the impressions created by the used of, “My muscles moved with steel” 
(line 14) and “We thunder through ravines” (line 18). The use of the word “impressions” seemed to have 
caused some amount of difficulty for candidates. Some candidates took a literal interpretation of the first 
quotation. An acceptable response for the first quotation was acknowledgement of the merger of the living 
with the non-living and/or the suggestion of power created. The latter also emphasized the power of the train, 
its speed and especially the loud sound it makes as it rushes through the valley. 
Part (c) required candidates to explain how the poet used contrast in lines 4–5 to hold the reader’s attention. 
Many candidates identified and explained the contrast, but some did not go on to fully explain how this 
contrast served to hold the reader’s attention. Acceptable responses should contain some of the following 
ideas: 
-5- 
The poet contrasts the train/nature; light (from the train)/darkness (of the night); being awake/asleep. 
The speaker shows us the trees, the mountains, the lake, mist and rain as he lies awake while everyone 
around him is asleep. Why is he awake? Why the details of nature? The poet creates these and other 
questions in our minds through the contrasts presented. These questions are only answered at the end of 
the poem, “I stay up half the night/To see the land I love”.
Part (d) required candidates to identify the literary device used in one of the following (1 mark) and 
comment on its effectiveness (2 marks): “Bridges of iron lace” (line 6) or “gullies washed with light” 
(line19). Acceptable responses for the former included a discussion which captured the following: 
Through visual imagery, this metaphor compares the design of the metallic structure to beautiful, 
delicate and patterned needlecraft–that of lace. This comparison extends the contrast between the sound 
of the train as it thunders in the night and the beauty and quiet of the trees, nature the land that he loves. 
For the latter, this metaphor/personification portrayed how the light of the train shines in the darkness, covering 
the gullies with its radiance.
For Part (e), candidates were asked to show how the poet captured the movement in this journey. 
Many candidates focused on movement as the train progressed so they gave information on the various 
sights that the persona experienced as the train moved along. Only a few commented on aspects of the poem 
which suggested movement, for example, diction, devices and rhythm. In other words, candidates seemed to 
relate more to content than to structure. Candidates were expected to mention for instance, the short lines, 
the rhyme scheme and strong stress, weak stress pattern which create a rhythm (beat) that suggests constant 
movement. In addition, candidates were expected to indicate that phrases and words such as “rhythm 
rocks”, “straining”, “thunder”, “rush”, “rattles”, “shake”, “jerk”, “shove”, produce alliterative and 
other sound effects that suggest the powerful engine heading to its destination. 
Part (f) asked candidates to describe the speaker’s attitude in the last two lines of the poem. 
Acceptable responses included: 
the attitude is one of patriotism/nationalism; the love for country is such that the speaker is willing 
to remain awake half the night, just to see his beloved country. Not even the lulling/rocking 
movement of the train could get him to sleep. 
Part (g) asked candidates to suggest another title for the poem (1 mark) and justify this with evidence from 
the poem (2 marks). This question was well done. Candidates used their creativity to find text-based 
suggestions for their titles. 
The mean for this question was 10.41 out of 20. 
Question 3 
Twenty-seven (0.13%) candidates of the 20 043 who attempted the question earned the full marks. The 
mean score (9.99) on Prose Fiction was the lowest of the three genres. 
For Part (a), most candidates had a fair sense of where the event was taking place, and were able to provide 
supporting evidence. Acceptable answers included, near Castle Rock or in a forested area or in the fringes. 
Part (b) (i), required candidates to state why Ralph was hiding, and (ii), asked for a description of his state of 
mind. Acceptable responses included, that he was hiding because he was in danger or he was being hunted by 
the others (“the hunters”). Acceptable responses for the second part of this question included that, Ralph was 
scared. He thought the hunters were pursuing him. He only felt safe when he realized that there was a feast and 
the hunters would be occupied with that. But this feeling of being safe was temporary as he realized that 
tomorrow would bring new dangers. 
-6- 
Many candidates seemed to have some difficulty responding to Part (c), which asked for an explanation of 
the writer’s use of contrast in the first paragraph. Some were not able to identify the contrast. Also, most of 
those who were able to identify the contrast could neither adequately explain it nor comment on how it was 
used by the writer. Many candidates omitted this question. Acceptable responses included: 
The writer contrasts the image of the hunters whom Ralph sees at present with the image of them as 
he had known them; the description of Bill, for instance, as a savage “striped brown, black, and 
red” does not fit the picture or image of Bill in shorts and shirts. Additionally, hunters are supposed 
to be strong and brave, and while the image of the hunters is terrifying in that it generates fear in 
Ralph, these hunters ironically, like Ralph, appear to be quite terrified (“and then had rushed back 
to the sunny rock as if terrified of the darkness under the trees”).
For Part (d), candidates were asked to identify the literary device used in, “The afternoon died away” (line 7) 
or “Ralph wormed out of the ferns” (line 8) and comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses 
included the following ideas: 
The former is personification/metaphor. The writer compares the passage of time from afternoon to 
night with death. This emphasizes the fear of the unknown and of danger that Ralph is perhaps 
associating with the night. It also suggests the slow passing of time for Ralph which he has to 
endure. The latter, is metaphor. It creates an image of Ralph’s crawling movement on the ground to 
avoid detection. The image of him moving as a worm (hinting perhaps at his vulnerability) also 
helps the reader to understand the possible danger that he may face. 
For Part (e), two marks were awarded for candidates’ giving the impressions created by “impenetrable 
thicket” (line 9) or, “He peered with elaborate caution” (lines 9-10). Again, the word “impressions” seemed 
to have been a challenge for candidates and many merely paraphrased or explained the selected phrase. 
Acceptable responses should note that 
“impenetrable thicket”— conveys the idea that Ralph is hemmed in by the thick vegetation that he 
cannot get through. This can only symbolize his feeling of being trapped by his hunters or his sense 
of being surrounded by ‘savages’ or the intensity of terror that he cannot think through or the great 
psychological distance between Ralph and his pursuers. The latter (“He peered with elaborate 
caution”) suggests that this expression also emphasizes the danger that Ralph faces. He has been 
hiding and is going to great lengths to protect himself. 
Part (f) asked candidates to explain how the writer maintained suspense in the passage. Some candidates 
seemed to have difficulty identifying suspense, while others mentioned one incident that caused suspense 
but failed to describe how suspense was maintained. Acceptable responses should mention that the writer 
suggests that the hunters are new to this role and seem to be as afraid as the hunted (“terrified of the 
darkness”). Suspense is also maintained because though Ralph is safe because of the feast he is aware that 
tomorrow could present a different situation. It is this sense of uncertainty which heightens the tension and 
keeps the reader in suspense. 
Finally, in Part (g), candidates were asked to identify the overall mood of the passage and to provide 
evidential support for their answer. In some instances, although they identified the correct mood (fear/
anxiety), candidates did not provide textual support. Acceptable responses should include words used such 
as “panic”, “terrified”, “savage” to create the mood; the idea of the hunt is established in the first 
paragraph; the setting (forest, night/darkness) enforces the mood. 
-7- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01 
Teachers are encouraged to continue working with students to hone their skills in appreciating and 
responding to literature. In the examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a careful 
reading of the evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will 
assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some students use in their responses 
to the questions. Moreover, students need to be familiar with appropriate literary language and use it in their 
writing and should understand genre-specific words, terms and concepts such as mood and suspense. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and 
emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by 
their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative 
thinking that the study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions 
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and 
other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a 
text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama 
Shakespeare: — A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Of the pair of questions on this text, the second was more popular than the first, Question 1 sought to elicit a 
discussion on the pairs of rulers, Oberon and Titania and Theseus and Hippolyta. Part (a) asked for a 
description of the circumstances of Oberon’s meeting with Titania in the magic wood. Part (b) required a 
discussion of what resulted from this meeting and Part (c), a comparison of Shakespeare’s presentation of 
Oberon and Titania with that of Theseus and Hippolyta. 
-8- 
Generally, candidates performed satisfactorily, especially in Parts (a) and (b). Part (c), however, posed a 
challenge in that candidates failed to compare Shakespeare’s presentation of one couple with his 
presentation of the other. Candidates fell short in discussing the playwright’s craft. They did not provide an 
adequate comparison of the two couples. For instance, Theseus and Hippolyta personify sobriety and mature
wisdom; they represent stability and a unique union of love and reason, unlike Oberon and Titania, whose 
marital discord upsets the balance in nature and affects the human kingdom. 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays. The mean for this question was 17.41. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to describe the nature of the complaint in Act 1 Scene 1, when 
Egeus approached the court of Theseus regarding Hermia; Part (b) asked for a discussion of the effect of this 
incident on the course of events and Part (c), a discussion of Shakespeare’s presentation of male dominance 
of women in the play. 
This was the most popular of the four drama questions. Candidates demonstrated superior knowledge of the 
text, especially in Parts (a) and (b). However, many candidates resorted to storytelling of the incidents 
identified as examples of male dominance in Part (c). It appears that candidates were not effectively 
prepared to answer questions dealing with dramatic presentations/dramatic techniques. 
The mean for the question was 21.74. 
Modern Drama: Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the second most popular question in the drama section. Part (a) asked for a description of a 
situation in which one character was portrayed as mostly good and one that was mostly evil; Part (b), a 
discussion of the character who made the drama more exciting as a result of this portrayal and finally, Part 
(c), a discussion of how the playwright used the final scene to reinforce the idea that good triumphs over 
evil. 
Generally, candidates were quite knowledgeable of the text although for Part (a) some selected scenes 
instead of ‘a situation’. Candidates referred to characters such as George, Len, Miss Aggy, Pa Ben and Lois. 
Part (b) was the most challenging as candidates generalized and related incidents from the play without 
elaborating. Also, opinions, when given did not have supporting details. Some candidates deviated from the 
characters discussed in Part (a) and so lost marks. For Part (c), some candidates did not focus enough or at 
all on the final scene, though they used aspects from other parts of the play. A few gave their personal 
religious views on this final scene, without the requisite textual reference. Those candidates who gave 
effective responses noted the ways in which this final scene brings together the major characters; the 
effectiveness of the flashback to answer pertinent questions, especially for Miss Aggy’s benefit; the 
symbolism of the circle and the confessions and reaffirmation of love and loyalty. 
The mean for this question was 19.65. 
Question 4 
This was the least popular question on this paper, as only 1 227 candidates attempted it. 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to describe one instance when the educational appeal of 
storytelling was highlighted. Some candidates found the concept of “educational appeal” problematic as they 
were unable to identify the ‘teachable’ moments in the play. Educational appeal was taken to mean
‘education’, as in Len’s academic achievements. Part (b) asked for a description of one instance when 
humour was used to entertain the audience. Candidates did well in this part as there was no shortage of 
examples of, for instance, Pa Ben’s witty interaction with his ‘on-stage’ audience; the biting exchange 
-9- 
between Lois and Miss Aggy, among others. Part (c) asked candidates to show how Rhone used the art of 
storytelling to appeal to his audience. Acceptable responses included, (but were not limited to) song and 
dance; proverbs and sayings; suspense; preparing for the storytelling event. 
The mean for this question was 16.14. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were, “Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge” and “South”. 
Approximately 25 per cent of the candidates attempted this question. Part (a) required candidates to describe 
the places being described in the poems; Part (b) asked for a comparison of the speakers’ attitudes to the 
places portrayed and for Part (c), the task was to discuss one device from each poem which was used to 
create an effective portrayal of the places. 
Some candidates confused “South” with “A Contemplation Upon Flowers” and “God’s Grandeur”. 
Part (a) assessed candidates’ knowledge of the poems by asking them to recall and summarize the 
information. Candidates were more knowledgeable about “Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge,”
and most responded well to this part of the question. Candidates found Part (b) challenging and many 
struggled with the vocabulary to capture, describe or define “speakers attitudes” (such as reflective, 
nostalgic, and appreciative). Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft), posed its usual 
challenges. In many instances, devices were mentioned but the discussion was vague and lacked textual 
support. There was some confusion regarding the simile (which many candidates continue to misspell) and 
metaphor. Many did not link the devices with the effective portrayal of the places being discussed. 
The mean for this question was 16.78. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose from the prescribed list two poems 
that focused on the theme of a memorable event or experience to answer the question set. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the event or experience in each poem; Part (b) asked candidates to compare the 
speakers’ attitudes to the event or experience and finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem 
which is used to present this event or experience. 
Part (a) was handled well for the most part. Popular poem choices were, “Dulce Et Decorum Est”, “Forgive 
My Guilt” and “Dreaming Black Boy.” In this part of the question, candidates were expected to name the 
poems selected but sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. Candidates demonstrated limited 
knowledge about the following poems: “Orchids”, “A Stone’s Throw”, “Theme for English B” and “It is the 
Constant Image of Your Face.” For Part (b), some candidates had difficulty in determining the speaker(s), 
therefore, they were in many instances, unable to address attitude. 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of the memorable event and 
experience. Some candidates mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not 
identify the devices. 
The mean for this question was 16.83. 
-10- 
Prose Fiction 
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A questions. 
These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the comparative treatment of two 
novels. 
Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular. However, some of the candidates who attempted questions on 
this text demonstrated interesting insights. Part (a) of Question 7 asked for a description of two occasions in 
which readers get a rich picture of rural life. Appropriate responses could include Effita’s warnings of death; 
the No-name Lady’s habits; school activities; children’s games; church services and village gossip. Part (b) 
asked for one technique used by Forbes to create this effect. Candidates were expected to make references 
to, for instance, the use of the child’s voice or perspective; re-creation of diction and register of characters; 
recounting colourful conversations; symbols, metaphors, humour and proverbs. Part (c), asked for 
candidates to comment on the lessons that readers might glean from these presentations. Some candidates 
had challenges with the word glean. 
The mean for the question was 18.11. 
Question 8 
Question 8 asked for a discussion of the statement, “The narrator’s references to school life allow us to 
understand the complex social influences and the varying outcomes of schooling in rural Jamaica.” 
The term “complex social influences” seemed to have interfered with candidates’ understanding of the 
question. Candidates did not treat this as an argumentative essay in which the onus was on them to provide 
textual evidence to support the position taken. Strong textual evidence could have been taken from chapters 
such as “The Idiot”, “Miss Minnie” and “Little Fool Fool, Fathers and Travelers.”
Two candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.00. 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
Part (a) asked candidates to describe one incident in which Eva played a major part as Bee’s wife; Part (b), a 
discussion of her role as character in the novel as a whole and Part (c) required candidates to say how she 
differed from the other women in the novel. Generally, candidates did well but found Part (c) challenging as 
they merely narrated Eva’s qualities, with little emphasis on the actual difference between Eva and the other 
women and providing textual reference to support the points made. Acceptable responses for this part of the 
question should focus on the fact that Eva is the most developed of the female characters; she may be
compared with other women such as Eulalie, Ivan Morton’s wife, the other women who are portrayed as 
victims and objects. 
The mean for this question was 16.63. 
Question 10 
Candidates were asked to discuss the following statement: “The major conflict in The Wine of Astonishment
is between tradition and change.” Responses to this question ranged from poor to superior. Mediocre 
responses confined themselves to narration of the plot without analysis of the text, with little knowledge of 
background to the context. There was the tendency to focus mainly on Ivan or Bolo. Superior candidates 
were able to successfully analyse the events as told by Eva and demonstrate the link between conflict, 
tradition and change as well as provide evidence to support their responses. While most candidates 
-11- 
understood the nature of both tradition and conflict there were those who concentrated heavily on either 
tradition or conflict. 
The mean for this question was 16.56. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
This section is similar to the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, the short stories 
to be used are specified in one question, while for the other question candidates choose two appropriate short 
stories from the prescribed list to answer the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were, “Septimus” and “The Man of the House.” Part (a) asked 
candidates to describe how the mother of each boy demonstrated her special care for him. Part (b) asked for 
an explanation of the ways in which each boy went astray and Part (c) asked candidates to comment on the 
message each story conveyed about the boys. 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward. For Part (b), acceptable responses included the 
principle of sharing that Septimus’ mother tried to instill in him and for the latter story, how the boy failed 
to live up to his responsibilities. In Part (c), candidates experienced some difficulty in comprehending the 
word “conveys”. The message in the first story is the power of strong family values in changing and 
sustaining one’s character. For the latter, the message is that it takes more than goodwill to assume the 
responsibilities of manhood. 
The mean for this question was 16.11. 
Question 12 
In this question, candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list that shared the same 
theme and in Part (a), to describe what happened in each story; Part (b) asked for an explanation of how each 
story illustrated the theme. Some candidates failed to precisely define/describe the theme and consequently, 
many contrived their own (such as in “black’ and “food”). Part (c), asked for a comparison of the authors’ 
treatment of the theme in the two stories. Candidates knew the stories selected, for the most part. However, 
some candidates lost marks because they included inappropriate texts (such as poems, drama texts 
and novels). Apart from naming and discussing devices, candidates generally demonstrated a degree of 
weakness in writing the comparative essay. 
The mean for this question was 18.20. 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
On the whole, many essays were well structured, coherent and cohesive. Teachers and students should be 
commended for this achievement. However, more attention needs to be given to the acquisition of 
knowledge of literary terms and dramatic techniques, the ability to discuss their use by the playwright and to 
comment on their effectiveness. We urge teachers to continue to emphasize and recognize genre-specific 
terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness. 
Teachers and students should note that the January 2015 sitting will be the last of this current cycle of 
texts. 
-12- 
The new cycle of the syllabus will begin in June 2015. 
1. Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of preparation for the 
examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short stories) limits the depth of the 
discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer 
the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this is a 
genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs and 
finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students to 
develop the required skills. 
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‘dramatic function’ and ‘writer’s craft’. 
students need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected words or plotted 
events for particular effects. 
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the film version, 
for instance). 
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, describe, 
determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by dedicating time to closely 
examining the nature of the response expected by each of these and other key words used in questions. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and reading the poems, for instance, teachers 
are encouraged to take them one step further. They should be empowered to master the language to 
describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through 
listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument 
of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to explore, 
question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, this kind of 
applicability, is what sometimes emerged in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2015
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2015 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
2
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 
consists of three compulsory questions, one on each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and 
Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of subparts that require 
candidates to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for
each question, for a total of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination.
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer 
one question from each section.
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. 
Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section.
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to 
engage in comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the 
syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the 
examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from those which they have studied from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A 
questions and the two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story 
section is similar to the poetry section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be 
used and the other requires candidates to choose the appropriate short stories from the 
prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one question from 
this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per 
cent to the examination.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension
 Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a 
given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain 
how effectively these elements function in the passage.
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props
3  Awareness of the relationship between action and motive
 Awareness of the interaction among characters
The table below shows mean scores for Paper 01 for 2015: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for 2015
Paper 01 2015 Mean (20)
Drama 10.39
Poetry 9.75
Prose 12.02
Performance on Prose Fiction was the best compared with that of Drama and Poetry. 
Question 1: Drama
Part (a) asked candidates to briefly describe what is happening in the extract. Acceptable 
responses included Harry learns that his mother has been called to the hospital and that his 
father may be discharged. Candidates did fairly well on this question.
For Part (b), candidates were asked to refer to the exchange between Sam and Hally and 
explain the effect created by the use of short sentences in lines 3–16. Acceptable responses 
included the building of tension and speeding up of the action. Responses were somewhat 
vague for this part of the question. 
Part (c) asked candidates to suggest one reason for Hally’s mood change in line 17. 
Acceptable responses included, he realizes that his father may be discharged or his father 
has gotten worse. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to explain the dramatic function of the telephone call 
in line 24. In order to earn full marks, candidates needed to include one of the following: the 
call serves to introduce a point of tension; provide information about Hally’s parents (Hally 
thinking his mother is weak and not strong enough to resist her husband’s demands); provide 
clarification of the message; provide information on Hally (shows that he may be insincere or 
selfish or shows the relationship with his father). Some candidates did not earn full marks 
because the explanation was lacking. 
Part (e) asked candidates to describe the relationship between Sam and Hally and provide 
supporting evidence. Candidates did well on this part of the question. Acceptable responses 
included the idea that although it is an employer/employee relationship, it is a warm and 
caring one. 
For Part (f) (i), candidates were asked to explain the irony in lines 29–32 and Part (f) (ii) 
asked for a revelation of Hally’s character from these lines. Candidates did not perform well 
on this part of the question. Many did not see the irony in the son’s response that the hospital 
was best for his father and interpreted this as genuine concern for his father’s wellbeing and 
not as an indication of his own selfishness. 
4
Candidates were asked to suggest how Hally might react if his father came home and to 
provide justification for this suggestion. Candidates made sensible suggestions ranging from 
the son’s resentfulness, his failing his examinations, or his avoidance of his father since he 
wants to study. This question assessed candidates’ ability to use the context to make 
judgement and draw reasonable conclusions. 
Question 2: Poetry
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying the word (“again”) in stanza 1 that 
showed that the trumpeter had been to that location before. 
Part (b) required candidates to explain two images of the trumpeter that were suggested in 
stanza 1 and to provide the evidence. In some instances, the images were provided without 
the evidence and vice versa. Acceptable responses included: image of a crazy person, with 
the evidence, “no wild paranoid gaze”; a beggar, with evidence, “no palm turned upward”; 
a sad/depressed person, with evidence, “no sad haze…”; and a proud/confident person, with 
evidence, “only a prideful stare”. 
Part (c) required candidates to state three effects of the power of music in stanza 2. Many 
candidates gave literal responses and others simply ‘lifted’ portions of the poem to supply a 
response. Acceptable responses should have contained some of these ideas: kingdoms 
fall/power relationships change; people are liberated; people are empowered; prisoners are 
set free and earthquakes occur. 
Part (d) required candidates to identify the literary device used in one of the following and 
comment on its effectiveness: “cities that crack and crumble” (line 15) or “these piercing 
notes / may be daggers too” (lines 22–23). Acceptable responses for the former included a 
discussion which captures the following: The hard ‘c’ sound contributes to the force and 
impact of the fall. The crack speaks to the initial reaction to the force, whereas the 
crumbling, to the final movement in the process. The implicit comparison of a concrete 
structure being ‘broken’ by trumpet blasts may also allude to the fallen walls of Jericho after 
the collective ‘shout’/musical blast. The device here may be any of the following: 
alliteration, metaphor, onomatopoeia. 
For the latter, any of these devices is appropriate: metaphor/irony/paradox/oxymoron/word 
play. Irony/paradox is seen in that the musician is profoundly changed by the very change in 
his listeners. There is paradox in the fact that music portrays how the beauty of the music 
causes pain. Word play and oxymoron are evident in that “piercing notes” and “daggers”
both suggest wounds. There is a certain amount of incongruity in comparing the musical 
notes (something associated with healing and peace) with daggers (something associated 
with hurt and violence). 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to select an example of either rhyme or repetition and 
comment on its effectiveness. The attempt here was fair in that candidates had a good sense 
of these devices. Their shortcoming was commenting on the effectiveness. Regarding rhyme, 
there are significant sound effects and some amount of half rhyme, as in lines 6 and 7 
(“stare” and “aware” and lines 23 and 25, (“too” and “blue”). These long sounds 
contribute to the mood and enhance the intensity of the trumpet blasts. Regarding repetition, 
the word ‘no’ is repeated three times in stanza 1 and the phrase “down it comes” twice in 
stanza 2. The repeated “no” adds to the militancy of the trumpeter and reinforces the 
absence of what he is usually perceived to be (crazy and destitute). Stanza 2 builds the 
5
momentum as the music gathers a life and strength of its own, tearing down structures with 
its power. 
Candidates were asked to identify in Part (f), three ways in which the final stanza is different 
from the others. This was fairly manageable for the candidates. Acceptable responses 
included any of these three ways: it is shorter; it concentrates on the trumpeter and how he is 
affected by his own music; it shows the trumpeter has his own pain; it is more reflective; the 
more subtle effects of the music are evident. 
Part (g) asked candidates to identify, with supporting evidence, the speaker’s attitude to the 
trumpeter. Although many could not find the appropriate literary language, many conceded, 
rightly, that the attitude is positive. Appropriate responses for the attitude included
admiration, respect and appreciation. Supporting evidence included “man-god”; “he / 
stands, and with trumpet levelled”; “a prideful stare”; “he alone knows”.
Question 3
For Part (a) (i), most candidates were correct in identifying the setting (forest/near a river) 
and were able to say why Will captured the iguana Part (a) (ii), which was to provide food. 
Part (b) required candidates to use supporting evidence and say why the mood in paragraph 1 
is different from that of paragraph 2. Acceptable responses should have captured the contrast, 
such as the mood in paragraph 1 is peaceful, calm, quiet and serene while the mood created 
in paragraph 2 is tense, fearful and threatening. The response must have included the 
appropriate supporting evidence in order to gain full marks.
Many candidates seemed to have a challenge responding to Part (c), which asked for an 
explanation of the effect of each of these images: “giant fig tree with thick, gnarled roots” and 
“water seemed to turn from a dark green to an almost black”. Responses tended to be rather 
literal and descriptive. For the former, acceptable responses should have included the idea of 
the impact of the knotted roots, the strength of nature and an overall frightening/eerie effect. 
For the latter, the many references to water cannot be unnoticed. The progression to the 
darkness of the water engenders fear/threat and suggests an ominous mood. 
For Part (d), candidates were asked to identify one characteristic of Will and provide 
supporting evidence. Acceptable response included: Will is careful/cautious (he takes his time 
to catch the iguana; he moves slowly and quietly); Will is a skilled hunter (he is equipped for 
his job as he has his stick with the loop and the canvas bag to capture and store the iguana); 
Will is attuned to his environment (he is alert to any changes; he notices the changes in the 
water, the noise of the howler monkeys); he admires nature’s beauty (he looks at the sunset, 
he has a deep desire to live close to nature). 
For Part (e), three marks were awarded for candidates’ explanation of how dialogue 
contributes to suspense in the passage. Not many candidates earned full marks. Acceptable 
responses included: it increases the sense of danger (when Sharper tells Will that militia 
scouts are around); it reinforces the mood of fear (the dialogue occurs in whispers); it 
advances the plot (informing the reader that the characters are moving towards the cave and 
that others are there, in hiding). 
Part (f) asked candidates to suggest why Will dreams of building a house by the creek or 
river. Candidates attempted this part reasonably well. Acceptable responses included: Will 
6
likes the beauty of the river (the sunset, the water, the enormous trees); Will enjoys the calm 
and peacefulness of the environment and he enjoys the idea of freedom (going to far 
undiscovered places) that the river symbolizes. 
Finally, in Part (g), candidates were asked to predict, with justification, what would happen 
next in this episode. Candidates, for the most part, gave reasonable submissions such as the 
characters will go to the cave and find the others gone; the militia scouts will track them and 
might kill them; a battle might ensue or they will reach the cave and get a chance to eat the 
iguana. 
Recommendations 
Candidates continue to underperform in parts of the questions which require interpretive, 
analytical and non-literal responses. Therefore, teachers are encouraged to continue working 
with students to hone their skills in appreciating and responding to literature. In the 
examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a careful reading of the 
evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that 
will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events 
described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some 
students use in their responses to the questions.
Students need to get accustomed to and use in their writing, the appropriate literary language 
and understand genre-specific words, terms and concepts such as mood, effect, suspense and
attitude.
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously 
successful attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their 
varied interpretations and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of 
students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence 
for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the study of 
literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 22 of the 
syllabus)
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short 
stories, poems and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, 
states of consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these 
to everyday living
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and 
synthesis (the ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn 
from various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question)
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, 
analytical responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism
7  The ability to produce balanced, critical analyses
 The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various 
techniques in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and 
behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the examination and most particularly in 
Paper 02
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature.
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1
For the questions on Shakespeare, the first was more popular. Question 1 sought to elicit 
from candidates, a discussion on the theme of love. Part (a) asked for a description of the love 
relationship of one of the couples. Part (b) required a description of the challenges faced by 
the couple and Part (c), a discussion of one dramatic technique that Shakespeare used to 
portray the theme of love.
Candidates showed a preference for the relationship between Hermia and Lysander. While 
candidates generally gave an average response, some concentrated on retelling the plot 
without focusing on the question. Of the three areas for discussion, Part (c) was not handled 
well. Generally, candidates were unable to identify and discuss the dramatic techniques used 
to portray the theme of love. Acceptable responses for a discussion of dramatic technique 
should have included any one of the following: dramatic irony (as in Puck and the love 
potion); personification of male dominance (as in Shakespeare’s presentation of male 
characters such as Egeus, Theseus and Oberon); use of contrast; the presentation of the 
magic wood as a reflection of the ‘real’ world; humour; Puck (as a character and 
commentary on love); allusion (classical references to Hero and Leander’s tragic love story). 
Question 2
This question pertains to the issue of the powerful and the powerless. Part (a) asked 
candidates to describe one incident in which one character exerts power over another; Part (b) 
asked for a description of how the character responds to the situation and Part (c), a 
discussion of one dramatic technique Shakespeare used to present male dominance of women
in the play. 
The most popular relationship discussed was Egeus and Hermia. A description of the 
victim/powerless would have allowed candidates to gain full marks for Part (b). Based on the 
responses for Part (c), it appears that candidates were not effectively prepared to answer 
questions dealing with dramatic presentations/dramatic techniques. Acceptable responses for 
this part should have included any one of the following: dramatic irony, personification of 
male dominance, use of contrast, comic humour and the character of Puck as a commentary 
on love. 
8
Old Story Time
Question 3
Part (a) asked for a description of one incident in the play in which Pearl is featured and one 
in which Margaret is featured; Part (b) required a discussion of how either Pearl or Margaret 
contributes to the development of the play and finally, Part (c), a discussion of the 
playwright’s presentation of women in the play.
Generally, candidates were quite knowledgeable of the text, although for Part (a) many 
mentioned Miss Aggy’s abuse of Len and not the taunting exchange between Len and Pearl. 
Also, some candidates failed to mention Margaret’s racist tendencies and disparaging 
remarks about Miss Aggy and Len. Part (b) was treated superficially. Pearl’s altered 
appearance to mark the passage of time; Pearl as a foil; Miss Aggy’s ironic adoration of 
Margaret; and Margaret as the symbol of perfection were acceptable responses for Part (b). 
Part (c) required a discussion of any/all of these women — Miss Aggy, Pearl, Lois and 
Margaret. Some candidates did not focus enough or at all on Part (c). Acceptable responses 
included the role of single parents; sex and sexuality; dramatic irony; women as symbols; the 
use of contrast and the exploration of issues such as class, colour and gender. 
Question 4
For Part (a), candidates were asked to discuss why Len wrote the love letter (to Margaret). 
Most candidates handled this part of the question fairly well but some were of the incorrect 
view that Len was genuinely in love with Margaret and not that he was only following his 
mother’s instructions. Part (b) asked for an explanation of the effects this letter had on the 
development of the play. A glaring omission for this part was the significant effect of 
flashbacks. Part (c) asked candidates to discuss how Rhone uses the letter incident to portray 
one important theme in the play. A common theme discussed was racism. However, some 
candidates discussed this theme in very general terms and disregarded the context of the 
drama. 
Poetry
Question 5
The named poems in Question 5 were “Orchids” and “God’s Grandeur”. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the view of nature presented in each poem; Part (b) asked for the 
comment each poem makes on humanity’s impact on nature and for Part (c), the task was to 
discuss one device from each poem which was used to portray nature.
Generally, “God’s Grandeur” was handled better, although a few candidates confused this 
poem with “A Contemplation Upon Flowers”. 
Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft), posed a challenge for many 
candidates. In many instances, devices were mentioned but the discussion was vague and 
lacked textual support. There was some confusion regarding the simile (which candidates 
continue to misspell) and metaphor. Many did not link the device with the effective portrayal 
of nature. 
9
Question 6
By far the more popular question, this was the general question and candidates were required 
to choose from the prescribed list, two poems that focused on the theme of oppression to 
answer the question set. Part (a) required candidates to describe the nature of the oppression. 
Candidates generally discussed the oppressive situation but did not identify the type of 
oppression (for example, political and social) experienced by the speaker.
Part (b) asked candidates to explain how the oppression affects the speaker and finally, Part 
(c) asked candidates to discuss one device from each poem which is used to present the 
oppression. Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of 
oppression. This part of the question continues to pose a challenge to candidates. Some 
candidates mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify 
the devices.
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are 
Type A questions. These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the 
comparative treatment of two novels. 
Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular. Question 7 referenced the chapters/stories “Miss 
Minnie” and “Travellers or Fathers, or Little Fool Fool” and Part (a) asked for a description 
of the person who nurtures the child in each chapter/story. Acceptable responses for this part 
included Miss Minnie and Cudjoe Man. Part (b) asked for a discussion of how each child is 
affected by the person described in Part (a). For Part (c), candidates were asked to discuss 
Forbes’ presentation of family in the novel. Responses tended to be vague and very 
superficial. Candidates who attempted this question did not do very well and many scored 
zero.
Question 8 
This question asked for a discussion of the statement, “In Songs of Silence individuals are 
often in conflict with the community to which they belong.” Part (a) asked for a description 
of one of these characters — Mister Papacita, Effita and Cudjoe Man. Part (b) asked for a 
discussion on the ways in which Forbes presents the selected character’s difference and Part 
(c), asked for a discussion of Forbes’ presentation of community in the novel. Candidates 
tended to narrate and describe events in the novel without focusing on the question. In some 
instances, candidates created their own narratives in a bid to augment their responses. 
Therefore, scores achieved were quite low.
10
The Wine of Astonishment
Question 9 
Part (a) asked candidates to describe one incident in which the villagers of Bonasse 
experience betrayal. Acceptable responses included Ivan Morton’s response to his roots and 
values; Corporal Prince’s abusive behavior and Bolo’s ‘turning’ on his own people in 
frustration. Part (b) required a discussion of the impact on the Bonasse community. Part (c)
required candidates to explore how Eva’s voice contributes to a deeper understanding of the 
community’s sense of betrayal. Generally, candidates found Part (c) challenging as they 
merely narrated Eva’s qualities. Acceptable responses for this part of the question should 
have focused on the fact that Eva’s voice is one of an insider and not an outsider. She voices 
the collective consciousness of the Bonasse community; she is able to recall the community’s 
past and traditions and show the changes and even as a ‘sympathetic insider’ Eva shows 
some amount of objectivity by neither judging nor condemning the motives of those who, for 
instance, move away from the church.
 
Question 10 
Candidates were asked to respond to Bee’s report of Ivan’s statement: “We can’t be white but 
we can act white.” Part (a) asked for a description of the situation which prompts this 
statement. Part (b) required a discussion of the effects of this statement on Bee. Candidates 
did not manage this section satisfactorily. Acceptable responses included Bee’s anger, 
disappointment, shame, sadness and other suitable negative emotions, with textual evidence. 
Part (c) asked candidates to show how Lovelace uses the characterization of Ivan Morton to 
explore the theme of whiteness in the novel. Many candidates did not make a strong enough 
connection between the theme of whiteness and characterization. Acceptable responses 
included descriptions of Ivan and his European look (dress, chauffeur-driven); Ivan’s house 
as a symbol (he leaves his father’s house to live in Mr Richardson’s big white house); images 
of white/light (his light-skinned wife being selected over the village (black) beauty, Eulalie). 
Short Story
Question 11
The short story section patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. 
Additionally, the short stories to be used are specified in one question, while for the other
question; candidates choose two appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer 
the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were “Berry” and “Blackout.” This question
asked candidates to describe an incident in which racism occurs. Part (b) asked for a 
discussion of the consequences of this incident and Part (c) asked candidates to discuss how 
the writer uses dialogue or characterization to present the theme of racism. 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward and responded well to the instances of 
racism, especially in “Berry”. For Part (b), candidates tended to narrate the stories rather than 
discuss the consequences. Acceptable responses included Berry’s baffled/puzzled reflection; 
his labelling people as “good” or “bad”; the woman in “Blackout” is forced to reflect on her 
sense of superiority; the refusal of victims to be treated as such. 
11
Part (c) appears to have posed a challenge to some candidates as they did not attempt this part 
while others made personal comments on the stories. Acceptable responses included: 
dialogue is used to establish contrast and reflect social/racial differences; it sets the scene for 
racial tensions to emerge; it reinforces the plot and conflict; it reveals characters. In both 
stories, characterization is used to reveal hidden prejudices and racist attitudes; characters’ 
actions are used to reveal racism and the writers use contrasting characters to reveal racism. 
Question 12
In this question, candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list with 
the same theme, in this instance the theme of relationships. In Part (a), candidates were asked 
to describe the nature of one of the relationships; Part (b) asked for a discussion of how the 
persons involved are affected by the relationship and Part (c), asked candidates to show one 
way in which the writers sustain interest in the portrayal of the relationships. Candidates were 
comfortable in handling Part (a). They were less so for Part (b). Acceptable responses should 
have indicated through the various types of relationships (parent/child; husband/wife; 
grandmother/grandchild; employer/employee) whether the effect is a negative or positive 
one. In answering Part (c), the positive or negative effects on the relationships require 
identification of the technique used by the writers to convey the message. Acceptable 
responses included: narrative perspective; use of symbols; use of dialogue; flashback, 
especially in creating suspense; irony, suspense and satire. 
Observations and Recommendations 
Although we commend teachers for their hard work, we are encouraging them to pay more 
attention to these areas which usually form the Part (c) of the questions: knowledge of literary 
terms and dramatic techniques; the ability to discuss and comment on the effectiveness of 
techniques and devices. We urge teachers/instructors to continue to emphasize and recognize 
genre-specific terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness.
 Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of 
preparation for the examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short 
stories) limits the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong 
arguments.
 Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama 
text to answer the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in 
such instances as this is a genre-specific examination.
 The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to
weaken the analytical element in essays.
 Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, 
strengthen vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are 
encouraged to find opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which 
target introductory paragraphs and finding textual evidence to develop one point 
(even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students to develop the required skills.
 Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as dramatic function and 
writer’s craft. Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer 
deliberately selected words or plotted events for particular effects.
12
 Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they 
must be constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are 
being tested (and not the film version, for instance).
 Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, 
describe, determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by 
dedicating time to closely examining the nature of the response expected by each of 
these and other key words used in questions.  While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and/or reading the poems, for 
instance, teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be 
empowered to master the language to describe, explain and analyse with greater 
clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening and speaking.
 Teachers must remind students of the potential of literature. It is not merely a tool or 
an instrument of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can 
help students to explore, question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and 
attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what sometimes emerged in 
superior scripts.
Candidates are reminded that January 2015 will be the end of this cycle and hence this cycle 
of texts. A new cycle of texts will be used from June 2015. 
The Young Warriors
Jamaica Publishing House
Longman 
Viking 
Longman
2 
2 
4 
1 
Rhue, Morton The Wave Delacorte 4 
Rhys, Jean Wide Sargasso Sea W.W. Norton 4 and 5 
Rowling, J.K. The Harry Potter Series Scholastic Trade 1 through 5
Salinger, J.D. The Catcher in the Rye Little, Brown 4 and 5
Salkey, Andrew A Quality of Violence Hutchinson 5
Schaefer, Jack Shane HMco Children’s Books 2, 3, 4 and 5
Scott, Paul Staying On Avon 4 and 5
Selormey, Francis The Narrow Path Praeger 3, 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 42
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Selvon, Samuel A Brighter Sun
The Lonely Londoners
Ways of Sunlight
Longman 
Penguin 
Longman Kenya 
3 and 4 
4 and 5 
3 and 4 
Serrailler, Ian The Clashing Rocks
The Enchanted Island
The Road to Canterbury
The Silver Sword
The Way of Danger
Walck
Oxford University Press
Kestrel
Heinemann New 
Windmills
Oxford University Press
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Sewell, Anna Black Beauty Pearson Prentice Hall 1 and 2
Shelley, Mary Frankenstein Courier Dover 4 and 5
Sherlock, Philip M. The Iguana’s Tail
Three Finger Jack’s Treasure
Nelson 
St. Martin’s Press
1
1 
Shute, Nevil No Highway
Silver Sword
House of Stratus
Heinemann New
2 and 3
2 
Smith, Dodie The Hundred and One 
Dalmations
Viking 1 
Smith, Wilbur Elephant Song Random House 4 and 5 
Smucker, Barbara Underground to Canada Clarke, Irwin 1 
Spark, M. The Prime of Ms Jean
Brodie
Penguin 4 and 5 
Sparks, Beatrice It Happened to Nancy: A True 
Story from the Diary of a 
Teenager
Bt. Bound 3, 4 and 5 
Sperry, Armstrong The Boy Who Was Afraid Heinemann 1
St. Omer, Garth Lights on the Hill Heinemann 4 and 5
St. Rose, Marlene Into the Mosaic Athen 1, 2 and 3 
Steinbeck, John Cannery Row
Of Mice and Men 
The Red Pony
The Grapes of Wrath 
The Pearl
Penguin
Penguin
Penguin
Modern Library
Bantam
4 and 5
4 and 5 
3 
4 and 5 
3
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 43
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Stevenson, R. L. Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
Kidnapped (Abridged) 
Treasure Island
Bantam 
Signet Classic
Oxford University Press 
2 
2 
1 and 2 
Stoker, Bram Dracula Signet Classic 4 and 5 
Storr, Catherine The Boy and the Swan Deutsch 2 
Stowe, Harriet Beecher Uncle Tom’s Cabin Prentice 3 and 4
Stratton, Allan Chanda’s Secrets Longman 4 and 5
Streatfield, Noel Ballet Shoes Random House 1
Stuart, Morna Marassa and Midnight Heinemann 1, 2 and 3
Sutcliff, Rosemary Dawn Wind
The Mark of the Horse Lord
Three Legions
Oxford University Press
Front 
Oxford University Press
2 and 3 
2 and 3 
2 
Swarthout, Glendon Bless the Beasts and Children Doublday 3
Swift, Jonathan Gulliver’s Travels
(Abridged)
Nelsons 3 
Taylor, Mildred Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry Puffin 2 and 3 
Taylor, Theodore The Cay
Timothy of the Cay
Laurel Leaf
Harcourt
1 and 2 
1 and 2 
Temple, Francis The Ramsay Scallop Harper Trophy 3,4 and 5 
Theroux, Paul A Christmas Card Puffin 1
Tolkien, J. R. R. The Hobbit Houghton Mifflin 3
Twain, Mark The Prince and the Pauper
The Adventures of 
Huckleberry Finn
Penguin
Dent, Heinemann, 
Longman, Penguin 
Heinemann, Nelson, 
Penguin
2
4 and 5 
2, 3 and 4 
Ullstein, Susan Martin Luther King
Mother Theresa
Longman
Gareth Stevens
5
5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 44
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Van Der Leoff, A. R. Avalanche
Children of the Oregon Trail
Penguin
Puffin
2 
2 
Verne, Jules Around the World in Eighty 
Days
The Mysterious Island
Puffin
Signet
2 
2 
Twenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea
Dodo Press 2 
Walker, Alice The Color Purple The Women’s Press 5
Warner, Rex Greeks and Trojans
Men and Gods 
Heinemann New 
Windmills
NYRB Classics
2
1 and 2 
Waugh, Evelyn A Handful of Dust Penguin 4 and 5
Webster, Jean Daddy Long Legs Penguin 2 and 3
Westall, Robert The Machine Gunners Heinemann 5
Wharton, Edith The Age of Innocence Signet 4 and 5
White, Patrick The Aunt’s Story
The Tree of Man
Trafalgar Square
Vintage
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Wiggin, K. D. Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm Penguin 4 and 5 
Wilde, Oscar The Happy Prince and Other 
Stories
The Picture of Dorian Gray
Dover 
Prestwick House Inc.
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Wilder, Laura Farmer Boy
Little House in the Big Woods
Little House on the Prairie
Harper Trophy
Harper Fastival
Harper Trophy 
1
1 
1 
Williams, Tennessee The Glass Menagerie Penguin 4 and 5
Williamson, Henry Tarka the Otter Puffin 1
Wodehouse, P.G. Lord Emsworth Acts for the 
Best
The Collected Blandings
Short Stories
Penguin
Penguin
4 and 5
4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 45
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Woodford, Pegy Misfits Heinemann New 
Windmills
3 
Wright, Richard Native Son Blooms Literary Criticism 4 and 5 
Wyndham, John The Chrysalids Penguin 4 and 5 
Wyss, J. D. The Swiss Family Robinson Signet 1 and 2 
ANTHOLOGIES OF SHORT STORIES AND/OR EXCERPTS FROM NOVELS
West Indian
Adler, Sue Mightier Than the Lipstick Penguin 5
Anthony, Michael Cricket In the Road
The Chieftain’s Carnival and 
Other Stories
Deutsch 
Longman
1
4 and 5 
Black, C. V. Tales of Old Jamaica Collins 3
Collins, Merle Rain Darling Women’s Press 4 
Ellis, Zoila On Heroes, Lizards and Passion Cubola Productions 2, 3, and 4
Faustin, Charles Under the Storyteller’s Spell: 
Folk Tales from the Caribbean
Puffin, Viking 1 
Goodison, Lorna Baby Mother and the King of 
Swords
Longman 4 
Gordimer, Nadine Some Monday for Sure Heinemann 4 and 5
Gray, Cecil Response Nelson 2 and 3
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Backfire MacMillan 2
Lovelace, Earl A Brief Conversation and 
Other Stories
Persea Books 5
Mais, Roger Listen, the Wind Longman 5
Marshall, Paule Reena and Other Stories Feminist Press 3,4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 46
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
McKenzie, Alecia Satellite City and Other 
Stories
Longman 4 and 5 
McKenzie, Earl Two Roads to Mount Joyful
A Boy Named Ossie
Longman
Heinemann
4 and 5 
2, 3 and 4 
Narinesingh, R & C Insights Nelson 3 
Porritt, Jonathon Once Upon a Planet Puffin 1
Satchwell, Deryck The Alchemy of words: An 
Anthology of Belizean Literature 
for Secondary Schools (2 volumes)
Cubola Productions 1, 2 and 3 
Senior, Olive Summer Lightning
Arrival of the Snake Woman
Longman Caribbean
Longman Caribbean
4 and 5
4 and 5 
Sherlock, Philip M. West Indies Folk Tales Oxford University Press 1
Waters, Erika J. New Writing from the 
Caribbean
MacMillan 5
Young Colville Pataki Full Cubola Productions 3 and 4
Other
Arnott, Kathleen African Myths and Legends Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Ashley, Bernard Puffin Book of School Stories Puffin 1 
Barnes & Egford Twentieth Century Short 
Stories
Nelson 4 and 5 
Barnes, D. R Short Stories of Our time Harrap 4 and 5
Callendar, Timothy It so Happen Heinemann 2
Denny, Neville Pan African Short Stories Evans, Humanities 3
Dhondy, Farrukh East End at Your Feet Nelson 5
Fisk, Nicholas The Puffin Book of Science 
Fiction Stories
Puffin 1 and 2
Forster, E.M. Collected Short Stories Readers Union 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 47
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Goodwyn, Andrew Science Fiction Stories Oxford University Press 4 
Gordimer, Nadine Crimes of Conscience. 
Selected Short Stories
Heinemann 4 and 5 
Gray, J.E.B. Indian Tales and Legends Oxford University Press 4 and 5 
Hewett, R. A Choice of Poets Nelson 4 and 5 
Hunter, Jim Modern Short Stories Faber 4 and 5
Ireson, Barabara In a Class of Their Own Puffin 2 and 3
James, Joyce Dubliners Penguin, Wordsworth 
Publishers, Prestwic House
4 and 5
Kerven, Rosalind Earth Magic, Sky Magic Cambridge 3 and 4
Kipling, Rudyard Just So Stories Puffin 1
Lawrence, D.H. Love Among the Haystack and 
Other Stories
Selected Tales
Viking 5
4 and 5 
Lester, Julius Long Journey Home Puffin 4 and 5 
Martinez, Christina The Earth Needs Friends Penguin 1 and 2 
Maugham, W. Somerset The Kite and Other Stories Macmillan 2 
Phinn, Gervase The Turning Tide and Other 
Short Stories
Nelson 2 
Reeves, James Heroes and Monsters: 
Legends of Ancient Greece
Hippocrene Books 1 
Rich, Hilary and Mann, 
Ann
Frankie Mae and Other Stories Nelson 5
Rutherford & Hannah Commonwealth Short Stories Holmes and Meier 5
Smyth, W. M. Good Stories Edward Arnold 3
Taylor, Mildred D. The Friendship and Other 
Stories
Puffin 2
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 48
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Thomas, Dylan A Prospect of the Sea
Quite Early One Morning 
(Part 1)
Aldine
New direction Publishing
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
Walker, Alice Everyday Use and Other 
Stories
Rutgers University Press 4 and 5 
Wambeu, Daniel A Girl for Sale and Other 
Stories
Evans 5 
Welch, John Stories from South Asia Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Woodford, Peggy Misfits Teens 4
SOURCES OF POEMS
West Indian
Bailey, Nahdjla Time for Poetry Nelson 5
Bennett, Paula The Penguin Book of 
Caribbean Verse in English
Penguin 5
Brathwaite, Edward The Arrivants Oxford University Press 5 
Brown, Stewart Caribbean Poetry Now Edward Arnold 5 
Foster, John Spaceways. An Anthology of 
Space Poetry
Oxford University Press 1 
Figueroa, J. F. Caribbean Voices (2 Vols.) Evans 4 
Gasztold, Carmen Bernos Prayers from the Ark Penguin 1, 2 and 3
Gray, Cecil Bite In – Stage 2
Bite In – Stage 3
Bite In 3
Nelson
Nelson
Nelson
2
3 
4 
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Out for Stars 1 MacMillan 1, 2 and 3
Irish, J. A. George There is An Isle Somewhere Caribbean Research 
Centre
5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 49
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Mansfield and Armstrong Every Man Will Shout Oxford University Press 2, 3 and 4 
McKay, Claude Selected Poems Dover 3 
Morris, Mervyn The Pond & Other Poems New Beacon Books 4 and 5 
Mordecai, P. and Walker￾Gordon, G.
Sun Song 1 Longman 2 
Nash, Ogden Custard and Company Viking 1
Nichols, Grace Poetry Jump Up Puffin Books
Phinn, Gervasse Lizard Over Ice Nelson 1, 2 and 3
Pollard, Velma Anansesem Longman 3
Ramchand & Gray West Indian Poetry Longman 3, 4 and 5
Seymour, A. J. Selected Poems Blue Parrot Press 4
Walmsley, Anne The Sun’s Eye Longman Caribbean 2 and 3
Wilson, Donald New Ships Oxford University Press 2 and 3
Other 
Belloc, Hilaire Cautionary Verses for Boys 
and Girls
Puffin 2 and 3 
Benson, Gerard This Poem Doesn’t Rhyme Puffin 2 
Bleiman, Barbara Five Modern Poets Longman 4 and 5 
Collins, V.H. A Book of Narrative Verses Oxford University Press 4 and 5
Forde, A.N. Talk of the Tamarids Hodder Murray 3
Frost, Robert Selected Poems Cliff Road Books 4 and 5
Gasztold, Carmen Bernos Prayers from the Ark Penguin 2 and 3
Guiseppi, Neville and 
Undine
Out for Stars MacMillan 2 and 3
Hewett, R. A Choice of Poets Nelson 5
Hughes, Ted Here Today Nelson Thornes Ltd. 4 and 5
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 50
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Magee, Wes The Puffin Book of Christmas 
Poems
Puffin 3 and 4 
Porrit, Johnathan Once Upon a Planet Puffin 2 
Rosen, Michael Culture Shock Puffin 2 
PLAYS
West Indian
Braithwaite, Edward Odale’s Choice Evans 3
Campbell, Alistaire Anansi Nelson 3, 4 and 5
Hill, Errol The Ping Pong2
Plays for Today
MacMillan
Longman
4
3, 4 and 5 
Hillary, Samuel Chippy UWI Extra Mural
Department
3 
James, C. L. R. Beyond a Boundary Random Housing U.K. 5 
Noel, Keith Carlong Caribbean Drama for 
the Classroom
Carlong Publishers 3
Redhead, Wilfred Canaree and Pot1
Hoist Your Flag1
Three Comic Sketches1
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
UWI Extra Mural 
Department 1
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
1
1 
1 
Roach, Eric Belle Fanto
Calabash of Blood
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
4 and 5
5 
Rhone, Trevor Bella’s Gate Boy
Two Can Play and Other Plays
Old Story Time
Macmillan Caribbean
Macmillan Caribbean
Longman
4 and 5
4 and 5
3, 4 and 5 
N.B.: 1Plays for classroom activity and production in the first year. 2The Ping Pong by Errol Hill is available in Carray! A collection of six plays, edited by James Lee Wah, published by MacMillan. Other plays in the collection are: Africa Sling shot by Cicely Waite-Smith; dog and Iguana by Gladys Stuart; Riding Haas by Colville Young; Goose and Gander by Wilfred Redhead and Tears in the Gayelle by Dennis Noel.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 51
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Stone, Judy Champions of the Gayelle MacMillan Caribbean 4 and 5 
Waite-Smith, Cicely Africa Sling-Shot UWI Extra Mural 
Department
2 
Walcott, Derek Malcauchon, or Six in the 
Rain
UWI Extra Mural 
Department
5 
Walcott, Roderick The Harrowing of Benjy UWI Extra Mural 
Department
2 
Other
Anouilh, Jean Antigone (French language 
edition)
French & European Pub. 4 and 5
Bolt, Robert A Man for all Seasons A & C Black 4 and 5
Brecht, Bertolt The Caucasian Chalk Circle
The Life of Galileo
University of Minnesota 
Press
Penguin
5
5 
Chapman, Robert and 
Coxe, Louise
Billy Budd Hill and Wary 4 and 5
Chekhov, Anton The Cherry Orchard Diareads.com 5
Daviot, Gordon Richard of Bordeaux Little Brown 5 
Gheon, Henri Christmas in the Market Place J. Miller Ltd. 2 
Gogol, Nikolai The Government Inspector
The Long and Short and the 
Tall 
Oberon Books 
Heinemann
4 and 5 
5 
Hansberry, Lorraine To Be Young, Gifted and 
Black
A Raisin in the Sun
Vintage, 1st Vintage Books 4 and 5
Vintage 5
Ibsen, Henrik1 Noah
An Enemy of the People
Penguin 5
Modern Library 4 and 5
Jones, Toeckey In Search of Dragon’s 
Mountain
Nelson 4 and 5
N.B.: 1Plays for classroom activity and production in the first year.
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 52
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Miller, Arthur2 Death of a Salesman
The Crucible
Penguin
Heinemann, Penguin
5 
4 and 5 
NB: Isben Plays Two published by Methuen, contains both An enemy of the People and A doll’s House as well as Hedda Gabler. 2
Miller Plays published by Methuen, contains the following plays: All My sons, Death of a Salesman, The Crucible and 
A Memory of Two Mondays.
O’Casey, Sean Juno and the Paycock Players Press 4 and 5
Pomerance, Bernard The Elephant Man Grove Press 5 
Priestly, J.B. An Inspector Calls Dsmatists Play Service Inc. 5 
Rattigan, Terrence The Winslow Boy Nick Hern Books 3 
Rose, R. Twelve Angry Men Penguin 4 and 5 
Wood, E. R. The Eight Windmill Book of 
One-Act Plays
Heinemann Educational 
Publishers
2 
Schiach, Don The Wild Bunch and Other 
Plays
Nelson 3, 4, and 5 
Shakespeare, William As You Like It
Hamlet
Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan, Methuen, 
Oxford University Press, 
Penguin
4 and 5 
Julius Caesar Cambridge University 
Press, Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan Oxford 
University Press, Penguin, 
Rout, Stanley Thornes
3, 4 and 5
Macbeth Blackie, Cambridge 
University Press, Circle 
Press Publications, 
Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Hodder, 
Longman, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Oxford 
University Press, Penguin
3, 4 and 5
The Merchant of Venice Cambridge University 
Press, Collins, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Hutchinson, 
3, 4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 53
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
Longman, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Oxford 
University Press, Penguin, 
Routledge, Stanley 
Thornes
Richard III Oxford University Press, 
Penguin
4 and 5 
Romeo and Juliet Cambridge University 
Press, Collins E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, Longman, 
MacMillan
4 and 5
Twelfth Night Cambridge, E. Arnold, 
Heinemann, MacMillan, 
Methuen, Penguin
4 and 5
A Midsummer's Night Dream Oxford World's Clssics 3 and 4
Shaw, George Bernard Pygmalion
Saint Joan
Nu Vision Publication 4 and 5
5 
Sheridan, Richard The Rivals
The School for Scandal
Book Jungle 
Digireads.com 
4 and 5
5 
Swift, Paul No Man’s Land Nelson 4 and 5
Synge, John Riders to the Sea Dodo Press 4 and 5
Thomas, Dylan Under Milk Wood New Directions 
Publishing
4 and 5
Wesker, Arnold Chips with Everything Random House 5
Wilde, Oscar The Importance of Being 
Earnest
Prestwick House Inc. 5
Wilder, Thornton Our Town Harper Perennial Modern 
Classics
4 and 5 
Williams, Tennessee Glass Menagerie
A Streetcar Named Desire
New Directions 
Publishing
New Directions 
Publishing
4 and 5 
4 and 5 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 54
AUTHOR OR EDITOR TITLE PUBLISHER RECOMMENDED 
YEAR GROUP
SOURCES OF IDEAS FOR DRAMA ACTIVITIES
Adland, D. E. Group Drama (Books 1-4) Longman 1 
Allington, A. Drama and Education Blackwell 1 
Chilver, Peter Improvised Drama Batsford 1
Kissoon, Freddie 101 Creative Exercises in 
Drama 
Space Printers 1
Nuttall, Kenneth Let’s Act (Book 1-4) Longman 1
Slade, Peter Child Drama University of London Press 1
Way, Brian Development Through Drama Humanity Books 1
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 55
♦ GLOSSARY OF KEY WORDS USED IN THE ENGLISH 
A AND B EXAMINATIONS
WORD TASK
Compare Examine the similarities as well as differences to reach a general 
conclusion. 
For example: Compare the ways in which the two parents in the poems 
“Ana” and “Little Boy Crying” demonstrate their love for the children.
Compare and Contrast Examine the similarities as well as differences to reach a general 
conclusion. 
For example: Compare the ways in which the two parents in “Ana” and 
“Little Boy Crying” demonstrate their love for the children.
It must be noted that the word “compare” used by itself takes into 
consideration both similarities and differences. However, the word 
contrast used by itself indicates that only the differences must be 
provided.
For example: Discuss TWO ways in which Lady Macduff is contrasted 
with Lady Macbeth.
Comment Examine how the writer uses different elements (for example, literary 
device, stage props) to create effect and meaning. The overall effect on 
the piece of work must also be provided. The effect must take into 
account the writers purpose, and other elements of the piece of work, for 
example, theme, structure, diction and tone.
For example: Comment on the shifts of mood in the scene in which 
Lady Macduff appears. 
Describe Provide a detailed account, including significant characteristics or traits of 
the issue in question.
For example: Describe Macbeth’s conflicting thoughts and feelings as he 
contemplates the murder.
Discuss Provide an extended answer exploring related concepts and issues using 
detailed examples but not necessarily drawing a conclusion.
For example: Discuss the importance of Katherina’s final speech in The 
Taming of the Shrew
Explain Focus on what, how and why something occurred. State the reasons or 
justifications, interpretation of results and causes. 
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 56
WORD TASK
For example: Explain the dramatic significance of this scene.
Identify Extract the relevant information from the stimulus without explanation. 
For example: Identify TWO phrases in the last four lines that create the 
atmosphere of abandonment.
In English B Paper 02 questions can also ask for an explanation.
For example: Identify and explain TWO ways in which Shakespeare later 
impresses upon his audience what a horrible crime it is to kill a king.
Illustrate Provide examples to demonstrate or prove the subject of the question.
For example: Identify the character traits that can be seen in Amanda 
from the beginning of the play to this point. Illustrate EACH of the 
character traits you have identified.
List Itemise the requested information. Details are not required.
For example: List the main points of the opening speech.
Outline Show or trace the development of something from the point of origin to 
that specified in the question.
For example: Briefly outline what happens in the poems “Richard Cory” 
and “God’s Work”.
State Provide short concise answer without explanation.
For example: State TWO factors which the fitness proponents 
recommend that society should emphasise more.
Summarise Present the main points, ideas or concepts in your own words as far as 
possible.
For example: Summarise the MAJOR factors which contribute to the 
disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market.
Western Zone Office 20 February 2009
CXC 01/G/SYLL 09 57
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
EXAMINATION
SPECIMEN
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
FOR
ENGLISH A
READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
Each item in this test has four suggested answers lettered (A), (B), (C), (D). Read each item you are
about to answer and decide which choice is best. On your answer sheet find the number which
corresponds to your item and shade the space having the same letter as the answer you have choosen.
Look at the sample item below.
Sample Item
Choose the word that BEST completes the sentence and shade the appropriate space on the answer
sheet.
All the occupants were _______ from the building before the firemen arrived.
Sample Answer
(A) released
(B) protected A B C D
(C) evacuated
(D) extinguished
The best answer to this item is “evacuated”, so answer space (C) has been shaded.
Copyright © 2008 Caribbean Examinations Council.
All rights reserved.
01218010/SPEC 2009
®
- 2 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 1 - 5
Directions: Each sentence in this section has EITHER one OR two words missing. Choose from
the four suggested answers the word or pair of words which BEST completes the meaning of the
sentence.
1. His dismissal from the job is ______ since
he persists in arriving late.
(A) inevitable
(B) inexcusable
(C) informative
(D) inconceivable
2. The Minister pointed out that ______ building
developments along the river and ______
dumping of refuse into the watercourses
continue to be a problem to his ministry.
(A) illegal ... discriminate
(B) enormous ... poisonous
(C) unauthorised .... judicious
(D) unauthorised ... indiscriminate
3. Clinging to one of her relatives, the bereaved
mother tried to maintain her ______.
(A) grief
(B) status
(C) composure
(D) innocence
4. The investors expected a rate of return which
seemed _______ high in light of current
unfavourable economic conditions.
(A) favourable
(B) adequately
(C) unreasonably
(D) optimistically
5. The psychologist said that it was time that a
course on self respect was made ______ in
all secondary schools.
(A) legal
(B) optimal
(C) universal
(D) mandatory
- 3 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 6 - 10
Directions:
Each sentence in this section has ONE underlined word. Choose from the four suggested answers
the word which is nearly OPPOSITE in meaning to the underlined word.
6. Roger, who had consistently studied for the
whole year, was optimistic about his chances
in the examination.
(A) doubtful
(B) confident
(C) outspoken
(D) unconcerned
7. After the story was published in the
newspaper his colleagues ostracized him.
(A) accepted
(B) discussed
(C) understood
(D) recognised
8. The government’s new health plan was
greeted with enthusiasm.
(A) anxiety
(B) amazement
(C) indifference
(D) disappointment
9. There was a recent newsflash which said that
the state of emergency had been rescinded.
(A) revised
(B) effected
(C) renewed
(D) approved
10. Perhaps he would be more popular if he were
not so reticent.
(A) frank
(B) clever
(C) laughable
(D) talkative
- 4 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 11 - 15
Directions:
Choose from suggested answers A, B, C or D the one that BEST describes EACH of the sentences
11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.
(A) The sentence is too wordy, that is, repetitive or contains redundancies.
(B) The sentence contains clichés or misused metaphors.
(C) The sentence is incorrect grammatically or faulty in diction.
(D) The sentence is acceptable as it stands.
11. The Chernobyl accident gave a grim but
timely reminder to that no nation can hope to
isolate itself from the horrendous effects of
a major nuclear disaster.
12. Is it any wonder why the children that Miss
Brown knows behave like delinquents when
they have a heroine that thinks the worst of
them and their kind?
13. The publishers, flushed with the success of
their most recent anthology of Caribbean
poetry, launched out eagerly into the field of
short stories, hoping to reach even greater
heights.
14. The sighting of Halley’s Comet, a most unique
phenomenon, made 1986 a memorable year
in the annals of the twentieth century.
15. The little boys enjoyed playing in the yard of
the uninhabited house where no one had lived
for many years.
- 5 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 16 - 20
Directions: Some of the following sentences are unacceptable because of inappropriate grammar,
idiom or vocabulary. Some sentences are acceptable as they stand. No sentence contains more than
one inappropriate element.
Choose the one underlined part of the sentence that you feel is inappropriate by selecting the
appropriate letter. If the sentence is acceptable as it stands, choose D.
16. While driving through the ranch on a conducted tour the farmers were appall to see several diseased
 A B C
cattle. No error
 D
17. The soundness of the proposal introduced by the opposition members was quite evident though the
 A B
presentation was both criticised by the President and the Secretary of State. No error
 C D
18. We always feelgood whenever our cricketers playwell enough to win a series of matches convincingly.
 A B C
No error
 D
19. The two robbers, not knowing the value of the loot, were unable to agree on how to divide it among
 A B C
themselves. No error
D
20. One must be aware of threats to your health if happy living is one’s goal. No error
 A B C D
- 6 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 21 – 28
Directions: Read the following poem carefully and then answer items 21 - 28 on the basis of what is
stated or implied.
 Trane
Propped against the crowded bar
he pours into the curved and silver horn
his old unhappy longing for a home
the dancers twist and turn
5 he leans and wishes he could burn
his memories to ashes like some old notorious emperor
of Rome, but no stars blazed across the sky when he was born
no wise men found his hovel, this crowded bar
where dancers twist and turn
10 holds all the fame and recognition he will ever earn
on earth or heaven, he leans against the bar
and pours his old unhappy longing in the saxophone.
Edward Kamau Brathwaite
21. The “silver horn” in line 2 refers to
(A) a wine goblet
(B) an ice bucket
(C) a large vase
(D) a musical instrument
22. Where does the action in lines 1 – 3 take
place?
(A) In a hotel
(B) In a night club
(C) In a music hall
(D) In a living room
23. Lines 2 – 3 is an example of a
(A) personification
(B) simile
(C) hyperbole
(D) metaphor
24. In line 3, “his old unhappy longing for a home”
suggests that the character
(A) did not like music
(B) believed he had little talent
(C) was unhappy because he had no
house
(D) was longing for success and
recognition on a wide scale
- 7 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
25. Line 7 “...but no stars blazed across the sky
when he was born” suggests that
(A) he was born on a dark night
(B) no one was aware of his birth
(C) he was not born to famous parents
(D) his birth lacked great significance
26. The word “hovel” in line 8 refers to
(A) a hotel
(B) a cradle
(C) a poor home
(D) an animal’s pen
27. The poet refers to the birth of Christ in lines
(A) 1 – 2
(B) 5 – 6
(C) 7 – 8
(D) 10 – 11
28. Which of the following words BEST describes
the mood of the character in the poem?
(A) Anger
(B) Nostalgia
(C) Optimism
(D) Melancholy
- 8 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
10
15
20
25
Items 29 - 36
Directions: Read the following passage carefully and then answer items 29 - 36 on the basis of what
is stated or implied.
Nazruddin was an exotic, but he remained bound
to our community because he needed husbands
and wives for his children. I always knew that
in me he saw the prospective husband of one
of his daughters; but I had lived with this knowl￾edge for so long that it didn’t embarrass me. I
liked Nazruddin. I welcomed his visits, his talks,
his very alienness as he sat downstairs in our
drawing room or verandah and spoke of the
excitements of his far-off world.
He was a man of enthusiasms. He relished
everything he did. He liked the houses he bought
(always bargains), the restaurants he chose, the
dishes he had ordered. Everything worked out
well for him, and his tales of unfailing luck would
have made him intolerable if he didn’t have the
gift of describing things so well. He made me
long to do what he had done, to be where he
had been. In some ways he became my model.
He was something of a palmist, in addition to
everything else, and his readings were valued
because he could do them only when the mood
took him. When I was ten or twelve he had
given me a reading and had seen great things in
my hand. So I respected his judgement. He
added to that reading from time to time. I re￾member one occasion especially. He looked at
my palm then said, “You are the most faithful
man I know.” This didn’t please me; it seemed
to me he was offering me no life at all. I said,
“Can you read your own hand? Do you know
what’s in store for you?” He said, “Don’t I
know, don’t I know.”
The tone of his voice was different then, and I
saw that this man, for whom (according to his
talk) everything worked out beautifully, really
lived with a vision of things turning out badly. I
thought: This is how a man should behave; and
I felt close to him after that, closer than I did to
members of my own family.
 5
Then came the crash which some people had
been quietly prophesying for this successful
and talkative man. Nazruddin’s adopted
country became independent, quite suddenly,
and the news from that place for weeks and
months was of wars and killings. From the
way some people talked you might have be￾lieved that if Nazruddin had been another kind
of person, if he had boasted less of his suc￾cess, drunk less wine and been more seemly
in his behaviour, events would have taken an￾other turn. We heard that he had fled with
his family to Uganda. In due course he came
to the coast. People looking for a broken man
were disappointed. Nazruddin was as
sprightly as ever, still with his dark glasses
and suit. The disaster appeared not to have
touched him at all.
30
35
40
29. The reference to Nazruddin as “an exotic”
(line 1) indicates that he is
(A) boring
(B) snobbish
(C) scheming
(D) eccentric
30. “He relished everything he did” (lines 11 - 12)
suggests that Nazruddin
(A) enjoyed all his activities
(B) was an expert on everything
(C) succeeded at whatever he tried
(D) was proud of his accomplishments
45
50
55
- 9 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
31. The writer’s reaction to Nazruddin’s
comment, “You are the most faithful man I
know” (lines 28 - 29), indicates that the writer
(A) did not like faithful men
(B) had himself been unfaithful
(C) thought that faithful men led uninter￾esting lives
(D) felt that faithful men had short
life-spans
32. The answer “Don’t I know, don’t I know”
(lines 32 - 33), indicates to the writer that
Nazruddin
(A) did not really know much about
palmistry
(B) foresaw the possibility of
unfavourable events for himself
(C) was not being truthful about his
experiences
(D) did not know what the future held in
store for him
33. According to the extract which of the
following factors caused some people to
prophesy ill luck for Nazruddin?
 I. He was too boastful.
 II. He drank too much.
III. His behaviour was unacceptable.
(A) I and II only
(B) I and III only
(C) II and III only
(D) I, II and III
34. According to the extract, ONE of the reasons
the writer liked Nazruddin was that he
(A) inspired the writer to pattern himself
after him
(B) was a respected palmist in the com￾munity in which he lived
(C) considered the writer a prospective
husband for one of his daughters
(D) described interestingly to the writer
the secrets of his worldly successes
35. According to the extract, Nazruddin left the
country in which he was living because
(A) the new leaders were dissatisfied
with his behaviour and drove him
out
(B) his business there suffered financial
ruin
(C) there was violence in the country
(D) he could no longer find suitable
husbands and wives there for his
children
36. The impression given of Nazruddin in the
extract is that he
(A) was a coward
(B) was not easily daunted
(C) genuinely loved his family
(D) did not care about the community
- 10 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 37- 44
Directions: Read the following extract carefully and then answer items 37 - 44 on the basis of what
is stated or implied.
5
10
15
20
25
Every November the roads to Pushkar, a sleepy little town in western India, become clogged with
buses, bullock carts and camels bringing people to the Pushkar camel fair. Hundreds of camel herders
along with the thousands who are already there camped outside on the reddish rust sand dunes from afar
look like the mounds of paprika in a spice shop. Here, for two weeks before the full moon, camels are
bought, bartered and sold.
The Raikas, independent and hospitable people, are descended from a tribe that migrated to Asia
from Germany centuries ago. According to their mythology, however, Siva, a god of the Hindu trinity,
created the first camel. Siva had four daughters, and each married a Rajput (or King) of the highest caste.
Their children became camel herders, grew tall, thin yet strong, with high cheekbones and oval faces.
These mythic forebears of the Raikas could live for days solely on camel milk.
The Raikas are known by many names: raberai, or “guide”, by those who respect them; and bhool,
or “ghost”, by others, perhaps jealous of their freedom. It is easy to understand how the Raikas got this
last name, as they can appear suddenly and mysteriously on the horizon with a single camel, or even a
magnificent herd of a hundred. The focal point of the Raika culture is the camel; it is reflected in their
language, their religion and their mobility. They have 400 synonyms for camel, and refer to their favourite
camels with affectionate names like “Raieao”, which means brown. Herders grow up learning 15 calls to
their camels.
The Raika man wears simple attire: a white tunic top and dhoti, a cloth wrapped around his waist
and pulled up between his legs, Gandhi-style. He may toss a worn blanket elegantly over one shoulder,
creating style with simple dignity and poise. The Raikas’ world of brown sands and brown camels is
gloriously brightened with garments the shades of amber, rose and orange. Every morning, young men
deftly wrap scarlet turbans, 3 yards long and a yard wide, around their heads for protection against the
desert’s day-time heat and bitter night-time cold. At sundown, the sun’s sinking light seems to make the
turbans glow. Night or day, the business at hand is camels. Everything else - the dentist with his suitcase
of instruments and false teeth, the barber ready to give a quick shave on the sands, the bhopa or musician
playing ballads about the camel god Pabu, the stalls with sweets - is a distraction. Here the visitor can
learn anything and everything about camels.
37. The writer mentions the congestion on the
roads to Pushkar in order to
(A) show the popularity of the camel fair
(B) comment on the poor state of the
roads
(C) prove that Pushkar is not a sleepy
town
(D) suggest that traffic jams can be
found everywhere
38. According to the passage, how long does the
camel fair last?
(A) Ten days
(B) Two weeks
(C) Until the full moon
(D) Until all the camels are sold
- 11 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
39. Which of the following does mythology as￾cribe to the Raikas?
(A) They can exist solely on camel’s milk.
(B) They migrated to Germany centuries
ago.
(C) They are the descendants of a Hindu
god.
(D) They became camel herders at the
suggestion of Parvati.
40. The word “hospitable” (line 6) is CLOSEST
in meaning to
(A) proud
(B) happy
(C) ancient
(D) friendly
41. The writer suggests that “bhool” could be an
appropriate name for the Raikas because
(A) many Raikas are jealous of their free-
 dom
(B) they belong to a tribe that is practi-
 cally extinct
(C) they can surprise people by their sud-
 den appearance
(D) many people are afraid of them
42. The writer mentions that the Raikas have “400
synonyms for camel” (line 15) and that
herders “grow up learning 15 calls to their
camels” (lines 16 - 17) to show
(A) their superiority in comparison to
their herders
(B) that the Raikas know everything
about camels
(C) that the Raikas are careless about
names
(D) how important the camels are to the
Raikas
43. As a means of protection against desert tem￾peratures, the Raikas
(A) wrap long turbans around their heads
(B) wear white tunic tops and dhotis
(C) brighten their garments with coloured
 materials
(D) are never without blankets around
 their shoulders
44. In the extract, which of the following is NOT
stated about the Raikas?
(A) They are friendly.
(B) They dress simply.
(C) They are respectful.
(D) They enjoy freedom.
- 12 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 45 - 52
Directions: Read the following advertisement carefully and then answer items 45 - 52 on the basis
of what is stated or implied.
GIVE YOUR CHILD THE CHILDREN’S ASPIRIN MORE DOCTORS
RECOMMEND THAN ANY OTHER. It tastes better. Its pure, natural (not artificial)
orange flavour and creamy smoothness make it more pleasant for children.
It’s the highest quality. Scientifically tested ingredients and 224 quality-control
checks ensure maximum reliability.
In a national survey it was picked 4 to 1 by children’s doctors who recommended
an individual brand. Of course, little boys and girls prefer the genuine orange flavour of
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
But even more important to you, as a mother, is the reliable purity of this
aspirin itself. It takes 224 careful product-control checks to ensure the highest quality. But it’s
worth it. Because that’s what makes
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
the preferred way to relieve the big fevers, little aches, the distress children suffer when
they come down with colds. Doctorsknow about the highest quality of this aspirin. That’s why,
in a survey covering practically all of the children’s doctors in the nation,
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN
was specified 4 to 1 among those who recommended a brand.
But one thing the majority of children’s doctors do not favour is the addition of
other ingredients (such as bufferin) to children’s aspirin. So always give your children pure
ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR CHILDREN. 5
10
15
20
45. One of the claims made by the passage is
that St. Michael aspirin
(A) is the only children’s aspirin
(B) works faster than other brands
(C) tastes better than other aspirins
(D) is used by mothers all over the world
46. From the passage it can be inferred that
doctors recommend St. Michael aspirin
because
(A) children like it
(B) it is easy to obtain
(C) its quality is excellent
(D) it is the cheapest brand
- 13 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
47. The passage is directed specifically to
(A) children
(B) mothers
(C) doctors
(D) druggists
48. The words ST. MICHAEL ASPIRIN FOR
CHILDREN (line 8) are printed in block
capitals to
(A) give a neat appearance
(B) introduce a new product
(C) capture the attention of the reader
(D) prove reliability through quality
control
49. The author mentions the number of quality
checks on St. Michael aspirin to tell the reader
that
(A) it relieves all children’s diseases
(B) no artificial ingredients are added
(C) it has been recommended by many
doctors
(D) the product is safe and superior to
others
50. Which of the following was a result of the
survey mentioned in line 6?
(A) It was decided not to add bufferin to
children’s aspirin.
(B) It was decided that aspirin should be
flavoured with orange.
(C) The most popular brand of children’s
aspirin among doctors was St.
Michael.
(D) Mothers were assured of the purity
of the product.
51. Which of the following types of writing does
the writer employ in this advertisement?
(A) Expository
(B) Narrative
(C) Descriptive
(D) Persuasive
52. The MOST suitable title for this advertisement
is
(A) ASPIRIN: The Children’s Friend
(B) ASPIRIN: The Cure for All
(C) DRUGS For Children
(D) Mother’s Help!
- 14 -
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218010/SPEC 2009
Items 53 – 60
Directions: Read the following extract carefully and then answer items 53 - 60 on the basis of what is
stated or implied.
53. The slogan “Welcome to The Foothills”
suggests that the advertisement is directed
to
(A) persons from the lower income
group
(B) all visitors to the property
(C) only persons seeking to own property
at “The Foothills”
(D) middle and upper income groups
54. Which of the following BEST describes “The
Foothills”?
(A) A vacation home
(B) An all inclusive facility
(C) A gated housing development
(D) A retirement housing development
Caribbean Beat, Media and Editorial Projects Ltd.,
July 2006, p.12.
55. The size of the lots shown on the
advertisement range from
(A) 1,000 to 9,000 square feet
(B) 6,000 to 8,000 square feet
(C) 7,000 to 8,000 square feet
(D) 6,000 to 9,000 square feet
56. What information is given to help persons find
out more about “The Foothills”?
(A) E-mail address only
(B) E-mail address and telephone number
(C) E-mail address, fax number and
website
(D) E-mail, website and telephone
numbers
57. If Mr Glen Selman purchased lot number 2,
he will be CLOSEST to which of the
following sporting facilities?
(A) Pool hall
(B) Golf course
(C) Jogging track
(D) Swimming pool
58. Which of the following BEST explains the
presence of the security booths on the
property?
(A) There is much crime in the area.
(B) Access to the property is restricted.
(C) The owners want to keep visitors out.
(D) The property owners require
protection.
59. The information given in “conveniently located
seven minutes from Trincity mall and easy
access to the airport, golf course and schools”
suggests that the property is
(A) close to everything
(B) located seven minutes away from
everything
(C) the most important place in the
community
(D) ideally located in relation to
significant places
60. Which of the following can be included to
make “The Foothills” even more attractive
to potential buyers?
(A) A taxi service
(B) A supermarket
(C) Banking services
(D) A secondary school
- 15 -
01218010/SPEC 2009
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS TEST.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
EXAMINATION 
ENGLISH A 
SPECIMEN PAPER 
Paper 02 – General Proficiency 
2 hours 40 minutes
READ THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY.
1. Section A consists of ONE question. You MUST answer this question.
2. Section B consists of TWO questions. You MUST answer both questions from 
this section.
3. Section C consists of THREE questions. You MUST answer ONE question 
from this section.
4. Section D consists of TWO questions. You MUST answer ONE question from 
this section.
5. You are advised to take some time to read through the paper and plan your 
answers.
DO NOT TURN THIS PAGE UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO.
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council.
All rights reserved.
01218020/SPEC 2012
FORM 01218020/SPEC 2012
 TEST CODE 01218020
- 2 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION A 
(Suggested time: 35 minutes)
Answer Question 1.
1. Read the following newspaper article on brain health carefully and then write a 
summary of it in NOT MORE THAN 120 words. If this limit is exceeded, only 
the first 120 words of your answer will be read and assessed. As far as possible, 
use your OWN words. Your summary must be in continuous prose.
You may use the answer booklet to jot down a plan of your points or make notes. 
THIS WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on how well you
(a) were able to identify the main ideas and opinions in the extract
(b) organized and expressed these ideas
(c) used appropriate grammar, sentence structure, vocabulary, spelling and 
punctuation. 
 
 
People generally take the brain and its functions for granted, especially in the 
first forty years of life. Even though the brain is considered to be one of the most 
important organs in the human body, we don’t pay much attention to keeping it fit and 
healthy. This is an understandable situation since life usually forces us to be active on 
many levels in our younger years, but we need to pay more careful attention to brain 
health, especially in light of the demands of modern life. Generally, when people think 
about staying fit, they only focus from the neck down. However, the health of your 
body should also include your brain. A healthy brain plays a critical role in almost 
everything you do: thinking, feeling, remembering, working, playing, and even 
sleeping. Improving your brain health can protect you from dementia, increase your 
memory and sharpen your concentration.
There is much that can be done to keep the brain healthy at any age. Lists 
widely offered include simple, and even funny things, like brushing your teeth with the 
unfamiliar hand, or showering in the dark, walking and gardening, all of which are low, 
or free of cost. Recommended routines include physical activity, which increases the 
flow of blood to the brain; maintaining social contacts and having intelligent 
conversations; sleeping well. On the other hand there is a list of things to avoid. 
Examples from that list include that you should be careful not to drink to excess, you 
should not ignore any changes in your physical or mental health, try not to be isolated 
in your home, and certainly do not entertain the idea that you are too old to take up 
something new. The most outstanding of all the recommendations is physical activity.
Physical activity is one of the best ways to promote the growth of new brain 
cells and keep the brain healthy. Exercise increases levels of brain chemicals that 
encourage the growth of nerve cells and this explains to some extent why aerobic 
activity enhances memory skills, and why moderately strenuous activity is strongly 
associated with successful brain aging. An interesting form of physical activity is 
- 3 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
dance. Learning a dance can nourish brain cells, which translates to cognitive skills in 
the real world, and dancing requires twists and turns that strengthen the brain 
connections.
There is always the caution attached, that you use common sense when 
increasing physical activity. Extra care is necessary when you have not exercised for a 
long time, and it is very important to consult with your doctor or health care provider 
before starting an exercise programme or increasing your activity.
“Keeping Your Brain Healthy” The Barbados Advocate, 
October 4, 2009, p. 26.
Total 30 marks
- 4 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION B
(Suggested time: 40 minutes)
Answer Questions 2 and 3.
2. Read the passage below carefully and then answer all the questions that follow.
 “My turn now,” said Bobby, and the others ran to hide as he started to count. 
Celia was hunting for a good hiding-place among the trees near to the fence when she 
heard a low hiss. She looked keenly, but though her eyes were used to the darkness, 
she could see no one. The hiss came again – surely from very near? 
 Celia turned this way and that, trying to see with her whole body, to pierce the 
darkness. As the sound came again, she rushed straight towards it and then gasped in 
surprise as she felt flesh against her face and outstretched hands.
 Then she realized what the scamps had been doing. Dingo and Jiggs had taken 
off their shirts. In the moonless dark of the night, their brown skins would make 
them invisible. Their pants, being a dull khaki, were quite safe from detection. She 
wanted to laugh out, but Bobby would be sure to hear. In fact he was already coming 
in their direction. Celia was hastily pushed behind Jiggs and cautioned to stay 
absolutely still. As Bobby approached, it gave her a strange feeling to know that he 
was looking straight at them and could not see them. She felt as though she really 
was invisible, as if she needed his seeing to make her really exist. She felt light, 
insubstantial, a ghost. Bobby came to within a few feet of them, then wandered off, 
still searching earnestly.
And so time passed – days of schoolwork and afternoons of play. Mrs. Wilson 
had great trouble trying to get the children to settle down to serious homework during 
the evenings. Dingo and Jiggs hated any form of regimentation and could not see 
why they should do more work at home than they did at school. This of course made 
Celia reluctant to do her work too. One day matters came to a head.
Adapted from Joy Moore, “The Cousins” Backfire: 
A Collection of Caribbean Short Stories, 
Macmillan Education, 1973, p. 99.
 (a) What game were the children playing? (1 mark )
 (b) Why did the boys remove their shirts while playing? (2 marks)
 (c) What did the boys do (lines 8 - 17) to make Celia call them “scamps”?
 (2 marks)
 (d) Identify TWO phrases, one in paragraph 1 and one in paragraph 3 which 
indicate that the children took the game seriously. (2 marks)
 (e) Quote the evidence from paragraph 3 that suggests that Celia was 
uncomfortable with not being seen. (2 marks)
(f) Which phrase in paragraph 3 indicates that Celia felt relief? (2 marks)
5
10
15
20
- 5 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
 (g) According to paragraph 4, what is the conflict between Mrs. Wilson and the 
children? (1 mark )
 (h) What metaphorical expression in paragraph 4 indicates that the conflict was 
eventually brought into the open? (1 mark )
(i) What does the writer use the word “regimentation” (line 20) to suggest? 
 (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
- 6 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
3. Read the passage below carefully and then answer all the questions that follow.
 Food on the whole offers an incomparable sensory experience. But with baked 
foods - desserts, pastries, pies, cakes - this experience is perfected. All the senses are 
delighted, and the pleasure is somehow heightened by the small portions of these treats 
we consume, relative to other meal components.
First of all they smell like heaven. For many of us, long before we even begin 
to appreciate the other fine things, the power of baked goods holds sway, largely due to 
the aroma that wafts out of the neighbourhood bakeries. It is a smell rich with promise. 
With baked goods you know that the source of that gorgeous scent is quite likely 
something edible. Good bread has a smell that makes you feel like you have walked 
into a warm room off a cold street.
Cakes are a different matter entirely. With the exception of plain, wholesome 
sponge cakes, instead of comforting, the scent of some cakes can be quite maddening. 
Soaked in essence of spices, the scent bursts from them as from ripe fruits. 
Then there’s sound. If you are not in the habit of listening to your cakes as they 
emerge from the oven, I don’t know that there is much point in trying to explain the 
language of baked goods. Something between a sizzle and a bubble, it is a deeply 
satisfying sound that says “I am here. I am ready. I will not disappoint?” But better 
than the sounds of the finished product are those of the preparation stage. Can I really 
be the only person who tries to emulate in her own kitchen the sounds made on 
cooking shows? In the staging of a TV show, batters sound thicker and creamier; the 
wooden spoon against the ceramic bowl so strong and confident; sugar and butter being 
creamed is an exquisite torture.
Adapted from “Not Bread Alone”,
Caribbean Beat No. 67, May-June 2004, p. 63.
 (a) According to the writer, what is the first thing people enjoy about baked foods? 
(1 mark )
 (b) What particular kinds of baked food are described in the passage? (2 marks)
 (c) Identify the expression in paragraph 2 which suggests that most people cannot 
resist the smell of baked foods. (2 marks)
 (d) Identify TWO phrases which suggest the pleasant effect from the smell of 
baked foods. (2 marks)
 (e) To what senses does the writer appeal in paragraphs 2 and 4? (2 marks)
(f) Why does the writer find the sound made by baked food as it is taken from the 
oven to be satisfying? (2 marks)
 (g) What TWO sounds are compared in the final paragraph? (2 marks)
(h) Why does the writer use “exquisite” to describe torture (line 22)? (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
5
10
15
20
- 7 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
SECTION C 
(Suggested time: 45 minutes)
Answer ONE question in this section.
Your answer in this section should be approximately 400 to 450 words in length.
You MUST write in Standard English. However, dialect may be used in conversation. 
You may use the answer booklet to jot down a plan of your points or make notes. THIS 
WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on how well you:
(a) used the stimulus provided
(b) developed and organized the content of your writing
(c) used language appropriate to your audience, purpose and content
(d) used appropriate grammar, sentence structure, paragraphs, vocabulary, spelling 
and punctuation.
EITHER
SHORT STORY (Questions 4 and 5)
4. Write a story based on the picture below.
Source: Caribbean Beat, November - December 2006, p. 63.
(35 marks)
- 8 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
OR
5. A cold hand grasped his wrist as he slumped to his knees.
Write a story which includes this sentence. (35 marks)
OR
DESCRIPTION (Question 6) 
6. The streets were filled with pedestrians in anticipation of their new leader.
Describe the mood of the pedestrians and the atmosphere in the streets. (35 marks)
SECTION D
(Suggested time: 30 minutes)
Answer ONE question in this section.
Your answer in this section should be approximately 250 to 300 words in length.
You MUST write in Standard English. You may use the answer booklet to jot down a 
plan of your points or make notes. THIS WILL NOT BE MARKED.
In your answer you will be assessed on the
(a) clarity, organization and development of your argument
(b) appropriateness of style for the intended audience
(c) correctness of grammar, sentences, paragraphs, vocabulary, spelling and 
punctuation.
EITHER
7. The government should ban the importation of all fruits and vegetables in support of 
local production.
Write an essay giving your views on this statement. (35 marks)
- 9 - 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE
01218020/SPEC 2012 
OR
8. “Hungry students cannot learn. Free lunch should be provided for all secondary school 
students.”
Write an argument EITHER supporting OR opposing this view. (35 marks)
END OF TEST
The Council has made every effort to trace copyright holders. However, if any have 
been inadvertently overlooked, or any material has been incorrectly acknowledged, 
CXC will be pleased to correct this at the earliest opportunity. 
01218020/SPEC 2012
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
EXAMINATION
ENGLISH A
SPECIMEN PAPER 2009
Item No. Key Syllabus
Reference
1 A U.A.
2 D U.A.
3 C U.A.
4 C U.A.
5 A U.A.
6 D U.A.
7 A U.A.
8 C U.A.
9 C U.A.
10 D U.A.
11 D U.A.
12 C U.A.
13 B U.A.
14 A U.A.
15 A U.A.
16 C U.A.
17 C U.A.
18 D U.A.
19 C U.A.
20 B U.A.
21 D U.C.
22 B U.C.
23 D U.C.
24 C U.C.
25 D U.C.
26 C U.C.
27 C U.C.
28 A U.C.
29 D U.C.
30 A U.C.
Item No. Key Syllabus
Reference
31 C U.C.
32 B U.C.
33 A U.C.
34 A U.C.
35 C U.C.
36 B U.C.
37 A U.B.
38 B U.B.
39 C U.B.
40 D U.B.
41 C U.B.
42 D U.B.
43 A U.B.
44 C U.B.
45 C U.D.
46 C U.D.
47 B U.D.
48 C U.C.
49 D U.D.
50 C U.D.
51 D U.D.
52 A U.D.
53 B U.B.
54 C I.B.
55 D U.B.
56 D U.B.
57 C U.B.
58 B U.B.
59 D U.B.
60 B U.B.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH A 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 2 -
Question 1
P1 UNDERSTANDING PROFILE: Maximum - 10 marks Content - 10
 
P2 EXPRESSION PROFILE: Maximum - 20 marks Organisation – 10
 Mechanics - 10 
Marks are to be awarded on the basis of information within the first 120 
words.
Marks will be awarded as follows:
(1) Content - 10 marks
(2) Organisation of Content - 10 marks
(3) Language Usage - 10 marks
(1) CONTENT
The answer will be judged for its adequacy with respect to the 
following criteria within the set word limit:
- accuracy of details (and their original linkages); and 
completeness
- clarity and faithfulness in respect of purpose/intent; and 
appropriateness of message and tone
- attention to perspective/point of view and consistency of focus
(2) ORGANISATION OF CONTENT
- arrangement presented through sequencing, concept of paragraph, 
selection of cohesive ties, achievement of economy.
- selection and arrangement of information resulting in coherent 
structure and sense of audience 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 3 -
Question 1 cont’d
(3) LANGUAGE USAGE
The following will be considered in awarding the grades:
(i) Correct use of structure and language:
- Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses chosen 
must be of the appropriate type)
- Sentences must be clear and meaningful 
- There must be effective and appropriate transition between 
sentences
 
- Subjects and verbs must agree
- Pronouns must agree with their antecedents
- There must be consistency in the use of tense
(ii) Accuracy of mechanics
Correct spelling and punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full 
stops, commas, question marks, etc.)
Marks will be awarded on the following scale:
N.B. 
 1. Students who have performed incompetently in the (1) and 
(2) will be limited to 3 marks in Mechanics of Writing
2. Answers which make consistent use of the words of the 
stimulus text will not be awarded more than 3 marks for 
Mechanics of Writing.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 4 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 1.
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates:
(i)&(ii) Superiority in addressing the criteria
(iii) Excellent, efficient and error-free 
use of language (as indicated under 
points 1 and 2 in Mechanics of 
Writing)
10 10 10
5. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Superiority in addressing the criteria
(iii) Very good use of language though 
there may be the occasional lapse in 
accuracy.
9 9 9 
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i)&(ii) Competence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Effective and accurate use of 
language though there may be a few 
lapses.
7-8 7-8 7-8 
3. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Competence in addressing the criteria
(iii) Some ability to use language 
accurately and effectively but with 
some inconsistency in accurate 
usage.
5-6 5-6 5-6 
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i)&(ii) Incompetence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Inability to use language accurately.
OR: Insufficient information presented in 
some area.
4 4 4 
1. Demonstrates: 
(i)&(ii) Incompetence in addressing the 
criteria
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language. 
OR: Too little information presented to 
make an assessment.
0-3 0-3 0-3 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 5 -
Question 1. cont’d
Sample Summary
The Caribbean is famous for its sporting talents. Although we welcome the 
emphasis on training in some countries, little attention is paid to 
nutrition in the Caribbean. 
Basic dietary provisions should be observed before, during and after 
competitions. The combination of training and nutrition ensures the best 
results without resorting to performance enhancing drugs. The value of 
nutrition can be seen especially where athletes may be attracted to fast 
foods, as well as fads and diets lacking essential nutrients.
The use of illegal drugs is increasing because of the rich rewards of 
winning. We must remember that drugs can harm our health even when we 
retire and we must ensure that our champions are drug-free and worthy role 
models.
 119 words 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 6 -
Question 2
(a) Her air of vulnerability. (2 marks)
(b) It was a hard task for him to live up to the image of being a doctor 
/ to fulfil (live up) to her expectations. (2 marks)
(c) Because she wanted him to become a doctor / dreamed of him becoming a 
doctor. (2 marks)
(d) Because he knew she was willing to sacrifice herself for him.
(2 marks)
(e) Mother and son. (1 marks)
(f) His father worked long hours / that he left early for work and came 
home late at night. (2 marks)
(g) A negative assessment. OR The father was considered to have been a 
failure despite the fact that he had worked hard. OR The son did not 
consider the father to have achieved much. (2 marks)
(h) There was zinc and broken fences / zinc and poverty. Gold lane 
connotes prosperity / riches but in fact it was poverty-stricken with 
zinc for fences. (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 7 -
SECTION 2
Question 3 
(a) negative (2 marks)
(b) never / none / (rhetorical question) (1 mark)
(c) move, swaying to / hooked (2 marks)
(d) there is too much of it / unimaginative (2 marks)
(e) Carnival (2 marks)
(f) Sand (2 marks)
(g) repetition of words beginning with “s” / alliteration (2 marks)
(h) July (2 marks)
Total 15 marks
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 8 -
Questions 4 and 5 – (Short Story) 35 marks
EXPRESSION C: 35 marks
The following criteria will be used to assess the composition:
(a) Content and relevance of story: 
(i) Story Line/Plot - Action Structure
 - The story line must be clearly developed (e.g. the events 
in the story must be linked appropriately.)
 - Links must be maintained appropriate to the choice of 
technique.
 - Conflict(s) must be satisfactorily resolved.
 - Action must be satisfactorily concluded.
 - Actions/events must be clearly motivated (e.g. there must 
be some plausible reason(s) for the things that happen).
 - Setting must be established (e.g. there must be a clear 
indication of where and when the action takes place).
(ii) Characterisation: 
 - Characters must be believable (e.g. characters must act 
and use language that is consistent with who they are).
 - Any change in character (e.g. personality/behaviour) must 
be clearly established.
 - Characters must be sufficiently developed.
 - Dialogue, when used, should be functional (e.g. may 
develop character, action and atmosphere).
(b) Organisation: 
 - Details/events must be logically and effectively sequenced.
(c) (i) Effective use of language: 
 - Appropriate choice of words to create characters, 
atmosphere and setting.
 - Economic and lively use of language to create story 
elements listed under (a) and (b).
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 9 -
Questions 4 and 5 - (Short Story) 35 marks cont’d 
(ii) Correct use of structures of the language: 
 - Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses 
chosen must be of the appropriate type).
 - Sentences must be clear.
 - Sentences must be meaningful.
 - There must be effective and appropriate transitions 
between sentences and paragraphs.
 - Subjects and verbs must agree.
 - Pronouns must agree with their antecedents.
 - There must be consistency in the use of tense.
(iii) Accuracy of mechanics: 
 - Correct spelling, punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full 
stops, question marks).
 - Paragraphing.
N.B.: If the student’s response satisfies no criteria in (a) page 8, 
the response must be given zero marks.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 10 -
Question 6 (Description) 35 marks
EXPRESSION C: 35 marks
Descriptive Answer
The following criteria will be used to assess the composition: 
(a) Structural Coherence of Description
(i) Description must be clearly constructed and developed 
(e.g. the different components must be linked 
appropriately).
(ii) The different focuses and facets must be linked 
appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus 
vs. peripheral detail). 
(iii) The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer 
must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements.
(iv) Choice of features to be described must be clearly 
motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture.
(b) Relation between object, state of mind, event, etc. being 
described and the language used.
(i) Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent 
within itself.
(ii) Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.) 
must be clearly established.
(iii) If characters are being described, they must be 
sufficiently developed.
(iv) Dialogue, when used, should be functional (e.g. to develop 
character, atmosphere, mood, etc.)
(c) Organisation:- 
(i) Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. 
(d) Effective use of language
(i) Varied and lively use of language to create picture 
elements. 
(ii) Appropriate choice of words to create characters, moods, 
tones, atmosphere and setting. 
 
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 11 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 4&5: 
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(i) Excellent manipulation of features of action 
structure and characterization. 
(ii) Excellent organisation.
(iii) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language. 
35-33
5. Suggests: 
(i) Very good manipulation of features of action 
structure characterization.
(ii) Very good organisation.
(iii) Very good use of language though there may be 
the occasional lapse in accuracy.
29-32
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good manipulation of features of action 
structure but with some unevenness in the 
presentation of these features.
(ii) Good organisation.
(iii) Effective and accurate use of language, though 
there may be a few lapses.
18-28
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the manipulation of features 
of action structure.
(ii) Some ability to organise events/ details.
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some slight inconsistency 
in accurate usage.
11-17
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manipulate vital features of 
action structure.
(ii) An inability to organise events and details in 
a logical manner.
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language.
OR: Insufficient information presented in some 
areas.
6-10
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manipulate features of 
action structure.
(ii) Total inability to organise events and details.
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-5 
Note: A response that is too short (less than one page, 200 words) should 
not be given a mark higher than 17/3.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 12 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 6. 
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(iv) Excellent manipulation of descriptive details 
(v) Excellent organisation.
(vi) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language. 35-33
5. Suggests: 
(iv) Very good manipulation of features 
descriptive details 
(v) Very good organisation.
(vi) Very good use of language though there may 
be the occasional lapse in accuracy.
29-32
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good manipulation of descriptive details
(ii) Good organisation.
(iii) Effective and accurate use of language, 
though there may be a few lapses.
18-28
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the manipulation of 
descriptive details.
(ii) Some ability to organise events/ details.
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some slight 
inconsistency in accurate usage.
11-17
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manipulate vital descriptive 
details.
(ii) An inability to organise events and details 
in a logical manner.
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language.
OR: Insufficient information presented in some 
area.
6-10
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manipulate descriptive 
details.
(ii) Total inability to organise events and 
details.
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-5 
Note: A response that is too short (less than one page, 200 words) should 
not be given a mark higher than 17/3.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 13 -
Questions 7-8 (Alternatives) 35 marks 
EXPRESSION D: 35 marks
Marks will be awarded for the following:
Area I:
1. Content - Argument and Comment
(a) The selection of information/details must be relevant to the 
focus of the argument.
(b) The argument must show a clear sense of the writer’s awareness 
of audience (for example, the writer may take the position that 
the audience : (i) knows nothing about the topic or (ii) shares 
basic information about the topic).
(c) The writer must use register and tone appropriate to the 
audience selected.
(d) The writer’s purpose must be clearly linked to audience needs 
(indicated in (b) (i) and (ii), for example, (i) to inform, 
persuade and convince of a point of view (ii) to 
persuade/convince)
(e) The supporting details that are used to develop the argument 
must fulfil one or more of the following functions: (i) expand, 
(ii) explain, (iii) illustrate (e.g. by means of anecdotes, etc) 
the main argument(s).
(f) In illustrating, explaining or expanding the argument, the 
writer must make use of a range of strategies, for example, 
defining, showing causes and effects, making meaningful 
comparisons.
(g) The writer must argue from a consistent point of view, this 
means the writer may anticipate the opposition’s arguments but 
must not contradict his/her own argument(s)/position. 
2. Organisation: - Logical development and reasoning
(a) The writer must present the details in a logical sequence that 
maintains the focus of the argument.
(b) The logical sequence of ideas/details must be clear within 
sentences, across sentences in paragraphs and between 
paragraphs.
(c) The conclusions the writer draws must arise naturally and 
logically from the arguments presented.
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 14 -
Questions 7-8 (Alternatives) 35 marks cont’d
Area II
Expression (A) skills ( marks)
1. Correct use of structures of the language:
 - Sentences must be complete (e.g. subordinate clauses chosen must 
be of the appropriate type). 
 - Sentences must be clear.
 - Sentences must be meaningful.
 - There must be effective and appropriate transitions between 
sentences and between paragraphs.
 - Subjects and verbs must agree.
 - Pronouns must agree with their antecedents.
 - There must be consistency in the use of tense.
2. Accuracy of mechanics: 
 - Correct spelling, punctuation (e.g. use of capitals, full stops, 
question marks)
 - Paragraphing
01218020/MS/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
- 15 -
The following grid should be used in the assessment of Question 4&5 : 
Area
I
Area 
II
SUPERIORITY 6. Demonstrates: 
(i) Excellent management of argument and content 
as indicated under Area I. (a) - (g). 
(ii) Excellent organisation of arguments and 
details as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(c). 
(iii) Excellent, effective and error-free use of 
language as indicated under Area II.
24-23 11-10
5. Suggests: 
(i) Very good management of argument and 
content as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(g). 
(ii) Very good organisation of arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Very good use of language though there may 
be the occasional lapse in accuracy.
22-20 9-8 
COMPETENCE 4. Demonstrates: 
(i) Good management of argument and content as 
indicated under Area I. (a) - (g). 
(ii) Good organisation of arguments and details. 
(iii) Good use of language, though there may be a 
few lapses.
19-12 7-6 
3. Suggests: 
(i) Inconsistency in the management of argument 
and content as indicated under Area I. (a) 
- (g). 
(ii) Some ability to organise arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Some ability to use language accurately and 
effectively but with some inconsistency in 
accurate usage.
11-8 5-3 
INCOMPETENCE 2. Suggests: 
(i) An inability to manage vital features of 
argument as indicated under Area I. (a) -
(g). 
(ii) An inability to organise arguments and 
details. 
(iii) Frequent, inaccurate use of language. 
OR: Insufficient information presented. 
7-5 2 
1. Demonstrates: 
(i) Total inability to manage features of 
argument. 
(ii) Total inability to organise arguments. 
(iii) Inability to use language accurately. 
OR: Too little information presented to make an 
assessment.
0-4 0-1 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
JANUARY 2004
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examination in January 2004 followed the format used in previous years. Paper
01, the multiple choice paper, tested the Understanding profile of the syllabus, and
Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the Expression component of the syllabus
as well as the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
When performance in 2004 is compared with performance in 2003, an increase in the
percentage of candidates achieving Grade III and above is evident. In 2003, 36 per
cent of the candidates achieved Grade I to III, while in 2004, 54 per cent achieved
Grade III or higher.
The overall mean in 2003 was 52.5 whereas in January 2004 it was 57.90. The overall
improvement is attributable to improvement in Paper 01 and in all areas of Paper 02.
Performance in the Comprehension section of Paper 02 showed the most dramatic
change, and the overall quality of the responses in this section was impressive.
The improvement in performance this year, expecially, in comprehension, is wel￾come. Hopefully, this level of performance can be maintained.
DETAILED COMMENTS
GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Section One
Question 1 (Expression)
This question tested candidates’ ability to summarise information given in an adver￾tisement. Generally, candidates seemed to understand what was required of them,
although far too many exceeded the maximum length specified in the instructions.
Candidates should be made aware that the part of their answer that goes beyond the
specified maximum length will NOT be marked by the Examiners.
- 3 -
 The text this year contained several technical terms. Candidates were required to re￾use a number of words from the test, rather than their own language, as is generally
required of this answer. It was, however, still necessary for candidates to take all the
itemised technical information and put it into prose, that is, in the form of well con￾structed, grammatically and semantically logical sentences.
Generally, candidates were able to identify the main points of the advertisement.
There was still, however, the need to be selective and for candidates to be aware that
all the pieces of information were not of equal value and significance in capturing the
basic meaning of the text.
Teachers should remember that summarising is a specialised skill which requires
special attention and emphasis, and should provide their students with abundant prac￾tice, on a variety of textual stimulus material.
Section Two
There was a general improvement when compared with January 2003, although a
number of candidates failed to score any marks on each question in this section.
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage from
a work of fiction written in Standard English. Candidates were required to show an
appreciation of the writer’s craft, the impressions which the work creates, and rela￾tionships between characters, rather than simply an understanding of the overtly stated
facts. Some candidates were unable to deduce what the setting of the text was (it was
the waiting room of an Embassy), and this affected their responses to some of the
parts of this question.
It was gratifying to see the improvement in performance. In response to Part (f),
many students answered correctly, with a variety of lexical choices, including ‘pro￾fessional’. Teachers are to be congratulated and are urged to make every effort to
ensure that the improvement is sustained, by making clear to candidates the particular
nature of the text for this question and the type of response required.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage on
the importance of investing in social services. The overall performance on this ques￾tion was good, and there was, no substantial difference between the performances in
- 4 -
Question 2 and Question 3.
Many candidates failed to answer correctly one of the interpretive questions; they
were unable to distiguish between “narrative, argumentative and descriptive” in a
characterisation of the passage. Part (d) also went beyond the mere factual, and
required candidates to perceive and appreciate the metaphorical expression of the
author. This part was quite well answered.
Teachers should make sure that candidates are able to perceive the different kinds
of responses required, for example, the difference between “What, according to the
passage ...?” and “What effect ...?”, “What impression ..?”. Some candidates left
these latter questions unanswered, which may suggest that they did not quite under￾stand what was required.
There still seems to be some uncertainty among some candidates as to what is a
“phase” (vis-à-vis “word”, “sentence”). Part (d) asked for `three phrases’. Some
candidates gave entire sentences. Generally speaking, candidates should be made
aware that their responses should be precise, not long-winded and explanatory, and
should most particularly NOT reproduce lengthy portions of the passage, perhaps
in the hope that somewhere in that volume lies the correct answer.
Section Three
Question 4, 5, 6 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continu￾ous prose. The most popular choice was Question 5, but Question 6 had the
highest mean. These were only a relatively small range of difference among the three
questions.
Some candidates had difficulty fitting the statement in Question 5 into their stories.
Thus these stories seemed to come to an abrupt end without the final statement
being well motivated.
There was some reduction in the incidence of candidates merely describing the
picture stimulus (Question 4). Teachers should continue to stress to candidates that
the picture stimulus requires the imaginative creation of a story. In giving freedom
to their imagination, however, candidates should not simply write their own story
unrelated (or only barely so) to the stimulus.
- 5 -
Question 6 was the most successfully done, and some candidates achieved the high￾est scores (up to 24/25) on this question. It will have been observed that in Question
5 the main protagonist is male, while in Questions 4 and 6, it is female. The examiners
strive to make the question paper gender-equal, but these were no real reason why
males should write only about their own gender and females likewise. A good short
story writer should be able to write about both male and female protagonists and
candidates should be encouraged to practise writing about a variety of themes.
While some candidates have more of a flair for short story writing than others, it is
clear that those who like to read, whatever their subjects may be, become more
familiar with words and experiences and thus give themselves an advantage over
those who do not.
Section Four
Question 7 and 8 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to write persuasively and present sound argu￾ments in Standard English. These was a marked preference for Question 8 over
Question 7, and in addition the mean for Question 8 was substantially higher than the
Question 7 mean. A further dramatic difference was the much larger percentage of
candidates receiving zero marks for Question 7 than for Question 8.
Question 7 was the more problematic of the two questions. A large number of
candidates mis-interpreted the terms “independent” and “patriotic”, both in general
and as they relate to newspapers in particular. These concepts should not be unfamil￾iar to an educated Caribbean young person and schools may wish to consider whether
sufficient attention is being paid to such basic concepts as media bias/independence/
partiality and loyalty to country/party/government, in Social Studies and Communi￾cation classes.
In one, particularly extreme case, “independent” was related to one’s ability to cook
and keep house. In other cases, there was no attempt to relate the concepts to the
particular case of the Media.
Most candidates chose Question 8. It was clearly within the current experiences of
the candidates and many were able to provide personal anecdotes to support their
arguments.
- 6 -
It is very important that candidates notice and respond to all the parts of the proposi￾tions, and to the precise instructions (‘write a letter’, ‘write an essay giving your
views’, and ‘EITHER supporting OR opposing’). For example, in Question 7,
some candidates ignored the specific allusion to ‘a newspaper’, and in Question 8
some candidates ignored ‘punished as adults’ and were content simply to argue that
16 year olds deserved to be punished for crimes committed.
The usual argumentation and writing/composition inadequacies were evident: mere
assertions without any supportive arguments or examples; misuse of pronouns; in￾correct subject-verb agreement especially where the noun subject is distant from the
verb; punctuation including paragraphing; and spelling, especially ‘there’, ‘their’.
Students should be made aware that English spelling is not generally and consistently
phonetic and the spelling of many words has to be learned individually, which is best
achieved through careful reading, punctuation including paragraphing.
GENERAL ADVICE
For the third time in recent years, one candidate was found to reproduce a published
story with amazing accuracy while another candidate reproduced a variant of a “CXC
Best Story”, retaining several chunks from the original. Teachers need to remind
candidates who are preparing to write the examination that at the very best, short
stories that demonstrate a lack of originality will not be awarded high scores. At
worst, short stories that bear a very close similarity to previous short stories or to
published work may raise suspecion of irregularity.
Teachers are again advised that, in the preparation of candidates, they should make
sure that they are familiar with the syllabus. The specific tasks set will vary from year
to year but they all fit the specifications set out in the syllabus. Further, it must be
noted that a new revised syllabus will take effect for examination from May/June
2006. Candidates should be encouraged to write legibly, conform to the instructions
(for example, maximum length of answers) and to complete the required number of
questions set.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examinations in 2004 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
In 2004, 49.5 per cent of the candidates at General Proficiency achieved Grade III and above, while 19.1 per
cent of the Basic Proficiency candidates achieved similar grades. The number of candidates taking the General
Proficiency examination was 81 120, while 3 068 sat for the Basic Proficiency examination.
The decline in the number of candidates taking Basic Proficiency continued in 2004, the numbers over the past
four years have been 4 502 (2001); 3 792 (2002); 3 777 (2003); 3 068 (2004).
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Basic Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2004 showed only a very marginal upward change over 2003. The
mean score in 2003, out of a possible 60, was 25.08 and this moved to 25.58 in 2004.
General Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2004 showed a slight decline when compared with 2003. The mean
score in Paper 01 moved downward from 34.63 in 2003 to 33.03 in 2004, out of a possible 60.
PAPER 02 - FREE RESPONSE
Basic Proficiency
Candidates’ performance in Paper 02 in 2004 was better than in 2003. The mean score increased from 22.10 in
2003 to 25.72 in 2004, out of a possible 80. Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 in
2004 was as follows:
Section 1 – Summary Skills (out of 20 marks) 5.06
Section 2 – Comprehension (out of 24 marks) 9.87
Section 3 _ Story Writing (out of 16 marks) 5.17
Section 4 – Argument (out of 20 marks) 5.62
- 3 -
General Proficiency
In Paper 02 performance, as indicated by a comparison of the section means in 2003 and 2004, is summarised
as follows:
Section 1 (Summary skills): there was an improvement in performance compared with 2003: 8.20 (2003) and
9.23 (2004)
Section 2 (Understanding): there was an improvement in performance compared with 2003: 8.22 (2003) and
9.30 (2004)
Section 3 (Story telling): there was no substantial difference in performance between 2003 and 2004: 8.84
(2003) and 8.79 (2004)
Section 4 (Argument): there was a slight decline in performance compared with 2003: 9.29 (2003) and 8.66
(2004)
Candidates’ performance in expression tasks on Paper 02 (that is, Sections 1, 3 and 4) was very similar in 2004
to what it was in 2003, with means of 26.68 and 26.33 in 2004 and 2003 respectively, out of a possible 75.
A comparison of the average mark in the four sections shows that there is little difference in performance
across the sections. It could suggest that teachers are covering all four areas evenly.
General Advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in
all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently
used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas,
upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers, whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
In Section 1, when a straightforward summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically
within the word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale, the CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates; it
should not be treated as a deletion exercise or a copying exercise.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be trained
to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked and to
frame their answers appropriately. For example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they
say ‘give a phrase’; at other times still they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give
precisely what they are asked to give. Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as
the passages on which the questions are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require
paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long
extract from the passage is a bad strategy, one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in others. Every
candidate doing this examination should have read the best stories from preceding years in order to get a sense
of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC.) These stories, however, should not be
memorised and reproduced with slight alterations.
- 4 -
In the case of Section 4, candidates should note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language
and presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions
carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that support their
points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some inexplicable reason, some candidates operate
on the assumption (consciously) or unconsciously) that they must agree with the opinion given and that if they
do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a
way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will achieve
higher scores than those they earn by merely agreeing with what they perceive to be the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE
Question 1 (Expression)
In this question candidates were asked to read an extract from a report on migration and to write a summary of
it in no more than 100 words. Candidates had to select the main information, organise it logically and present
it in standard English. All three components are important, but perhaps logical organisation of the information
is of the greatest importance in the teaching exercise. Candidates should be made aware that a summary is not
simply a series of statements presented with no expressed links between them.
Candidates were expected to identify the classes of migrants; the direction of migration; the relationship between
migration, population growth/decline and the labour market; and the consequences of migration on source
country and destination.
Performance on this question was slightly better than it was last year. However, there are still too many
candidates who pay absolutely no attention to the word limit given or dishonestly write an incorrect number of
words at the end. This latter strategy does not work.
Teachers should:
 (i) advise students against relying heavily on the original text and making just a few minor changes; and
using a deletion strategy to try to reduce the number of words in the original text
 (ii) give students more practice in distilling essential information and expressing it, as far as possible, in
their own words
(iii) advise students not to repeat points or insert too many illustrative examples of points made
(iv) above all remind students to observe the stated length
Advice to Teachers
In the training of students in summary writing, teachers should use a variety of selections, including sources
outside the textbooks, such as daily newspapers and current popular magazines. Teachers should remind
students to work with what is given – real-life material has imperfections and part of the training in summary
writing is to be able to determine what is important or critical and what is not in such material. Report and
summary writing is as much about arranging relevant points as it is about picking out the main points in what
someone else has said or written. In order to reflect the original accurately, attention should be paid to time
sequence and cause and effect relationships, as they occur in the original. Practice in the effective use of words
such as because, although, as a result and in spite of the fact that, which link clauses (containing relevant
points), will help immensely the task of summary and report writing.
- 5 -
SECTION TWO
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Eugenia O’neal’s “The Parillon Sisters”. For the most part, candidates responded correctly to
the items (a), (b), (c), (d) and (g). Item (e) was answered correctly ( = to indicate that it was not English) by
only a small percentage of candidates. Item (f) did not ask for words from the passage, which meant that those
candidates who interpreted it in that way restricted themselves unnecessarily. Item (h) was not answered
correctly by most candidates; the answer (the attitude) required was ‘pity’ or some equivalent. As usual, as
soon as the questions go beyond “who” and “what”, a great number of candidates find it difficult to cope with
inferences and implications.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward by the editor of the Weekend
Nation newspaper about the relationship between freedom and the law. Item (a) was answered incorrectly by
a great number of candidates because they did not pay attention to the instruction that only a phrase should be
given, not the whole of the first sentence. Items (b) and (c) were correctly answered by most candidates. The
answer to (c) hinged on the understanding of the word ‘ironically’, which involves an opposite relationship
(that is, contrary to expectation) between one thing and another. Item (d) required candidates to link the word
latter to a preceding idea but only a minority of candidates managed to do this successfully. Item (e), which
was intended as a straightforward question requiring an understanding of punctuation (Our supreme law, our
Constitution = Our supreme law is our Constitution), was answered correctly by only a small percentage of
candidates. Item (f) required candidates to solve a simple verbal logical problem. This was not correctly done
by most candidates. The two-part answer to (g) did not present any major problems.
Advice to Teachers
Reading of material from outside the Caribbean should help to expand the passive vocabulary and general
knowledge of students. Teachers still have to do more work on the literary devices used by writers in order to
get students to move beyond literal interpretations. In the explanation of literary devices and specific phrases/
sentences used by writers, candidates have to be accurate and precise in their answers. Teachers should
dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which really conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE
Questions 4, 5 and 6 (Expression)
Candidates did not seem to have any difficulty understanding the topics set, but there were still too many who
did not know what elements are required in short stories or who could not demonstrate those elements in their
writing. There were some candidates who wrote brilliant stories and generally candidates seemed to be reasonably
well prepared for this section of the examination. On the other hand, this section, as it usually does, exposed
the weaknesses of candidates who had not mastered the fundamentals of writing in English.
The picture stimulus in Question 4 seemed to appeal to many candidates and encouraged a variety of stories,
but this year there were more stories of a better standard. Happily, there was a smaller number of candidates
this year who just described the picture. This question elicited several excellent responses, including the one
deemed to be the ‘best story’. On the other hand, some stories had no more than a tenuous connection with the
stimulus. Teachers should remind candidates that when a story has no connection whatsoever to any of the
three stimuli given, it automatically is given zero marks.
- 6 -
Question 5 was a fairly popular choice and it produced a number of action stories. Some of these were very
good and imaginative in some cases and realistic in others. Some of these stories were awarded marks in the
top ranges. On the other hand, some candidates did not convincingly link the two parts of the stimulus together
in their stories or did not convincingly suggest that ‘life would be different’ from then on.
Question 6 was not a very popular choice. Candidates seemed to have difficulty tying the two parts of the
stimulus together. This question did not produce any outstanding stories.
Advice to Teachers
Teachers should not encourage students to over-indulge in the expression of literary devices. There has to be a
match between the setting and the action. Students whose stories are impressive are those who use details to
create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Teachers need to give all students practice in action-oriented stories and
not restrict choices to emotional stories. Boys seem to prefer the former and not the latter, and teachers, if they
want all their students to succeed, should be aware of this. Students should be encouraged, as often as possible,
to interpret topics in a positive and wholesome way and not to restrict themselves to situations of poverty,
degradation and stress. Training in short story writing should include a lot of oral work and the telling of funny
stories and anecdotes where there is a concentration on the characters and what they say. Training in short story
writing must stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading. Although there is no penalty for
writing stories that are longer than is suggested in the rubric, a perusal of the scripts reveals that longer stories
tend to be weaker as they often get out of control.
SECTION FOUR
Question 7 and 8 (Expression)
On the whole, responses in this section were satisfactory. Candidates seemed to find the topics interesting and
manageable.
In responding to the statement in Question 7 many candidates did not address all of the points and so automatically
weakened their argument. It is necessary in a question such as this for candidates to be methodical in their
answers and not to contradict earlier points made.
In the case of Question 8 most candidates agreed with the topic statement, sometimes passionately, but did little
to show any further insightfulness. Some good responses from among those who disagreed pointed out the
problems and difficulties involved in such a proposal (for example, why 15 years of age, why only young men,
who would pay for the training, where would the trainees be housed). There were many spirited and well
written responses from candidates supporting the proposal as well as those opposing it.
Advice to Teachers
More attention should be paid to the organisation of arguments, that is, paragraphing of different points with
the relevant supporting evidence. The language should be clear and the reader should have no doubt about the
writer’s position on the issues. Candidates should not contradict their stated position. Poor sentence structure,
punctuation and spelling are sources of distraction and cause the reader to lose the focus of an argument.
Careful re-reading should help to remove such distractions.
- 7 -
Basic Proficiency
SECTION ONE
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage from a daily newspaper – a commissioner of
police’s report on offences and crimes during the year 2002. The majority of candidates showed a reasonable
level of understanding of the passage, though numbers and simple statistics proved difficult for many. Most,
however, in their summary, did not mention the point about the challenges faced by the police. The stronger
candidates were able to identify the main ideas in the passage and present a response largely using their own
words. The weaker candidates often exceeded the word limit and presented responses in the exact words of the
passage. Many of these simply reproduced sections of the passage joining them together incoherently. The
majority of these failed to master the mechanics of the language.
Advice to Teachers
Teachers need to ensure that their students receive more practice in summary writing since Question 1 is
compulsory. Special attention should be paid to concord, tense and sentence structure.
SECTION TWO
Question 2 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage. The chosen extract
was from Ama Ata Aidoo’s ‘Changes’. In general, the items were answered fairly well, though items (b) and
(c) proved to be much more challenging than the others. Very few candidates answered (b) correctly. In the
case of Item (d) (what kind of person), some candidates incorrectly interpreted this to mean occupation rather
than personality.
Advice to Teachers
Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set on the paper, questions requiring precise
answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure that students read questions a number of
times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the whole passage, candidates should also re￾read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to make sure that what they are thinking of
writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re-read what they have written to make sure
that it makes sense to someone reading it. As is the case generally, candidates would be helped tremendously
if they read more, which would make them more accustomed to written material.
Question 3 (Understanding)
This question tested candidates’ ability to read and understand a persuasive passage. In the one chosen, the
writer argued for a lengthening of the school year for American students. Items (a), (e) and (f) proved difficult
for most candidates. In many cases the candidates’ responses to Item (a) were not clear as to whether summer
was getting shorter in terms of days or whether it was coming to an end. In the case of Item (e), candidates
seemed to know what the word ‘attitude’ meant, but were confused with the word ‘sobering’. For Item (f)
many candidates incorrectly identified the American students as the correct response instead of students of
other industrialised nations.
- 8 -
Advice to Teachers
In preparation for Section Two teachers should give students more practice in comprehending extracts of writing
other than narrations. In fact, teachers should use various types of material from varying sources. Students
should get constant practice in responding directly and concisely to questions asked, using their own words
instead of lifting large pieces from the passage given. Students need to expand their vocabulary and one
effective way of doing this is by reading more.
SECTION THREE
Questions 4, 5 and 6 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively by writing a story based on a given
stimulus. Question 5 was the most popular choice and the least popular was Question 4, which was poorly
interpreted. In Questions 5 and 6 many candidates simply added the statement to the end of their story without
proper linkage. The majority of those who attempted Question 4 did not produce stories, but rather presented
descriptions of the boy or expositions on child care and abuse. Most of those who attempted Question 5 gave
depictions of a classroom scene so that the statement with ‘the pen’ would be relevant. However, there were a
few who depicted a farm scene because for them ‘the pen’ was an animal pen. A few of those who attempted
Question 6 based their stories on mysterious happenings, like ghosts and unidentified flying objects, but the
majority wrote stories about lies, theft and rape. The better candidates were able to develop a strong and
credible story line, presenting their work in acceptable standard English. The weaker candidates had difficulty
presenting a good story line and this was compounded by problems in the mechanics of grammar and sentence
construction. Many merely presented reports of events without conflict.
Advice to Teachers
Students should be encouraged to read more widely and practise writing more often. Students should get more
practice in writing stories based on pictures. Teachers should spend more time with students on the basic
elements of story writing. For example, students need more practice in incorporating dialogue into story writing.
They should also be given more exposure to figurative expressions.
SECTION FOUR
Questions 7 and 8 (Expression)
This section tested candidates’ ability to write persuasively in Standard English and to present sound arguments.
Many more candidates did Question 8 than Question 7. In Question 7 very few candidates were able to distinguish
between a reason and an excuse. Question 8 elicited many responses that vaguely addressed the various qualities
needed for success (for example, determination, manners, respect, hard work) rather than focus on skills and
knowledge. The stronger candidates gave evidence of persuasive techniques such as rhetorical questions,
proper use of statistics and appeal to authority. Many of these used what seemed like real life experiences to
support their positions. The weaker candidates were often very repetitive in presenting their argument. Errors
in the mechanics of writing were prevalent and many had difficulty writing continuous prose in standard English.
Often the structures used gave evidence of interference from the vernacular.
Advice to Teachers
More time needs to be spent on oral English to give the students familiarity and experience with the patterns
and rhythms of standard English. Teachers need to allot some time to teaching students to write clear opinion
statements which are supported by relevant examples.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2005 Caribbean Examinations Council ®.
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
JUNE 2005
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The table below shows the marks assigned to the different papers by profiles.
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Multiple Essay
Choice
Understanding 60*/35+ 25*/15+ 85*/50+
Expression – 75 75
 TOTAL 35 90 125
* raw score + computed score
The statistics this year have to be interpreted differently because there were two examinations at General
Proficiency – one for the Caribbean generally and one for Guyana specifically. Overall comparison with
previous years may be somewhat misleading because Guyana statistics are usually below the average and
consequently removing Guyana from the general statistics causes the average to rise.
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 (Caribbean minus Guyana) 2005 (Guyana)
49.53 49.60 52.70 47.02
The performance mean (out of a total of 125) for the examination this year and previous years is as follows:
 (2003) 50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (Carib) (2005) 52.94 (Guy)
Average performance on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 (Caribbean) 2005 (Guyana)
34.63 33.09 33.67 28.78
- 3 -
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is as follows:
2003 2004 2005 2005
(Carib) (Guyana)
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 11.02
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 11.53
Section 3 Story Writing 8.84 8.79 9.70 8.29
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 10.26
A comparison of the average mark in the four sections for 2005 (Caribbean minus Guyana) shows that there
was a decline in performance in Section 1 (Summary skills). There are still too many candidates who come to
the examination with no knowledge of what a summary entails. The rise in the average mark for Argument is
attributable to the accessibility of the topics given.
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in all
areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently used
ones such as colons, semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper
case and lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be trained
to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked. For
example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they say ‘give a phrase’; at other times still
they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give.
Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as the passages on which the questions
are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to
a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy,
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in others. Every
candidate doing this examination should have read the best story from preceding years in order to get a sense of
what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC). These stories, however, should not be
memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. Although the question paper states word limits as mainly
approximations, the experience has been that the better candidates tend to write stories that fall within or not
too far out of the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of
control and weak. Often too, the candidates have insufficient time left to complete the paper properly. Teachers
are encouraged to help their candidates to plan their stories, focusing on building plots, intensifying conflict,
and creating a good sense of characters, instead of merely relating one or a string of events.
- 4 -
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and presentation
of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure
they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent
and clear in their presentation. Some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is,
however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most
likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think are
the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency (All territories except Guyana)
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read a passage taken from a supermarket magazine, identify the
problem (about the processing of chicken) as stated in the passage and to give Somerfield’s response to it in no
more than 120 words. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose
as in the model below:
In response to concerns that some chickens that are imported have a higher water content and
possibly other animal proteins, Somerfield has issued a statement assuring the public that its mission
is to provide quality chicken.
Somerfield further states that although it is legal to add water and proteins to chicken, if the
labelling does not adequately specify the contents, this may deceive the consumer. Somerfield assures
the public that its chickens, chilled, frozen, local or imported, undergo a process that uses water in a
controlled way for rinsing at different stages of the operation. No protein is added. Furthermore,
Somerfield has outside analysis done by an independently certified and sophisticated laboratory to
ensure quality chickens. (117 words/or below)
Performance on Question 1 this year was worse than last year. There are still too many candidates who pay
absolutely no attention to the word limit given. Some candidates did not put the reading material in proper
perspective/context and did not recognize or did not understand the statement “Adapted from Somerfield
magazine”. As usual, many candidates lifted relative portions of the passage verbatim or paraphrased them
indiscriminately. Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory reading and writing skills, assisted by a
fine vocabulary and the ability to write with purpose and a sense of audience.
Advice
To facilitate preparation for this section of the paper teachers should:
 i) remind candidates to observe the stated length.
 ii) drill candidates in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that
candidates read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical.
iii) help candidates to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills
(comprehension and composition skills)
iv) help candidates to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:-
a) using one’s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness
- 5 -
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and situa￾tion or context
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing and reading
e) correct mechanics of the language
v) stimulate candidates to read widely so that there can be an easier connection with the stimulus mate￾rial.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
This section requires candidates to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is
expected that candidates have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some ques￾tions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, candidates should know how to select words or
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also candidates need to do as the question asks: if
it requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an indication that
the candidate does not know exactly what the answer is. This is a recurrent problem which is likely to be the
kind that would respond to more oral and written practice in class with immediate feedback and discussion.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Anthony Winkler’s Going Home to Teach. The following were deemed to be the correct
answers. In the case of (a) and (d) suitable alternatives were accepted.
(a) officious/pompous
(b) three members of staff
(c) moored; ocean
(d) He disliked it
(e) Her ill-fitting dentures made her appear bad tempered, but she really had a pleasant personality
(f) School administrator/principal/headmaster
(g) She used to scold the labourers for their swearing
(a) Weaker candidates simply felt that the author thought of or was representing Dr Levy as a king. Many
of them did not pay attention to the wording of the question – “What opinion does he want you to
have?”, NOT “what does he say”.
(b) This question required candidates to make a simple mathematical deduction. Many could not. It ap￾pears that several included Dr Levy and therefore gave ‘four’ as the answer.
(c) Most candidates got one or the other of the two words (“moored”, “ocean”), but only a few got both
and many got neither. This suggests that candidates either do not know the term “metaphor” or do not
fully appreciate how it works. A few candidates ignored the stipulation that said “two words” and
wrote phrases. They received no marks as there was no indication that they knew what the words were.
(d) The question required candidates to summarize the author’s feelings about Dr Levy’s office. Most
candidates gave weak answers, answers that simply described the office.
(e) This question required evidence. Some candidates paraphrased; others simply quoted.
(f) Many candidates deduced that Dr Levy must be the principal of an institution or some kind of school
administrator. However, several candidates simply assumed that “Dr” meant medical doctor or dentist.
(g) This question also asked for evidence. Candidates needed to select the words that answered the ques￾tion (“boisterous labourers below whose profanity occasionally drifted in and buzzed her ears” did not
answer the question).
- 6 -
The responses suggest that many candidates understood the passage at the literal level. A large number also
seem to have understood some of the inner meaning, but did not understand what the questions required of
them. This seems to result from insufficient practice in, not simply how to answer questions, but also in how to
be confident about their own thoughts, how to express those thoughts in relation to specific questions and how
to make those thoughts clear to other people reading them.
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward in an article titled “Captur￾ing the Power of Classroom Assessment”. The following were deemed to be the correct answers.
(a) To remove the barriers to learning/to help candidates to overcome difficulty and learn.
(b) Teachers still pass on information to candidates/Candidates are still expected to learn it/Teachers still
employ a familiar variety of classroom assessments/Candidates still ask the critical question.
(c) Poking fun at candidates’ focus on the test above all else/trivialising their concern with the test.
(d) It seeks to involve the reader, get the reader to share his point of view/It seeks to establish solidarity/
direct appeal.
(e) He is careful in making his statements/not dogmatic/moderate/guarded; he is seeking to convince the
reader that he is reasonable, unbiased.
(f) It will allow teachers to assess candidates’ growth and development and identify their individual strengths
and weaknesses.
Candidates did well on questions that required no more than quoting directly from the passage. Thus, candi￾dates seemed to have little difficulty in answering (a), (b), and (f). In contrast, understanding the ‘writer’s
intent’ posed a challenge for many candidates – implicit meanings were not fully understood. Thus, (c) and (e)
proved difficult for many candidates. In attempts to answer questions, candidates wrote long sentences and
paragraphs hoping that the answer would emerge somehow.
Advice
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get candidates to move beyond literal interpretations. In the
explanation of literary devices and specific phrases and sentences used by writers, candidates have to be
accurate and precise in their answers. Teachers should dissuade candidates from giving long-winded answers
which seek to conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create
atmosphere and mood and good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving
like reports, with weak language. There were several candidates who attempted to use words and structures
with which they were not familiar. The result was that what they wrote was often verbose, sometimes unintel￾ligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help candidates feel comfortable with the sim￾plicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling based,
for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting class pro￾ductions – for listening, writing and peer interaction.
- 7 -
Two problems appearing on scripts in recent years and evident again this year were:
a) an element of what appears to be plagiarism or the writing of rehearsed stories with the ques￾tion stimulus merely tacked on;
b) essays that are not stories.
In the case of (a) teachers are advised to encourage candidates to learn from others but not represent other
people’s work as their own. On (b) candidates should be told and reminded that total failure to answer the
question results in zero marks being given to the response.
Some candidates also seem unable to differentiate description from story, especially when the stimulus is a
picture (as was the case with Question 4). Teachers should spend time helping candidates to appreciate the
power of description in storytelling but should stress the need for a story to do more than describe. This is likely
to become even more important in relation to next year’s paper which is expected to have topics for story as
well as description.
Often candidates’ ignorance of basic mechanics and spelling interferes with the examiner’s appreciation of the
story; sometimes the problem is not so great but is noticeable and affects the candidates’ marks.
Advice
Teachers should not encourage candidates to over-indulge in the expression of literary devices. There has to be
a match between the setting and the action. Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant
details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Teachers need to give all candidates practice in action-ori￾ented stories and not restrict choices to emotional stories. Candidates should be encouraged, as often as possi￾ble, to interpret topics in a positive and wholesome way and not to restrict themselves to situations of poverty,
degradation and stress. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting,
editing and proof reading.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
Candidates displayed similar strengths and weaknesses in writing argumentatively as in previous years,
although there were signs that candidates are being engaged more in how to structure their arguments. Never￾theless, too many candidates lack an awareness of topical issues. There is clear indication that they are unin￾formed about social and environmental factors within the region and globally and therefore experience great
difficulty in responding adequately to the topics. Candidates at this stage of their education need to read more
about what is happening around them; get information that can inform their opinion; and see how opinions are
expressed in various media. Despite the apparent ‘closeness’ of the topics to the candidates’ experiences, too
many candidates were unable to take their arguments to the level expected. Some who have an opinion express
their position in somewhat parochial and pedestrian ways. Others who had one idea kept repeating that idea
throughout the essay.
It is noticeable where candidates have been ‘taught’ how to organize their points in paragraphs. In a few cases
candidates had very similar beginning and closing statements. For example, several responses from the same
centre had essays that began: “It is fundamentally correct ...” and ended: “I conclude by restating...” This kind
of slavish reproduction should not be encouraged.
- 8 -
In summary the following were identified in candidates’ responses:
Candidates who displayed superiority understood the demands of the topic; identified their audience;
cogently presented their points and argued effectively using appropriate devices. Competent candi￾dates demonstrated some ability to raise points, but faltered on argumentation. Weak responses came
from candidates who had some knowledge of the topics, but lacked the skills of argumentation and
displayed very weak language skills.
General Proficiency (Guyana)
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to write a letter to their school principal pointing out the most important
information about an advertised youth symposium. Candidates were expected to identify the time and place of
the symposium, the topics to be covered, the contacts and deadlines. Candidates were expected to organise the
information and present it in continuous prose in not more than 100 words, as in the model below:
I am inviting you to the National Youth Symposium sponsored by the government and NGOs
on the Challenges of Adolescent Health to be held at the Obana Conference Centre, January 8,
2006. Sessions are designed for youth and other persons. The sessions will be conducted by
experts in the field of nutrition, human sexuality and diseases, drugs and other social issues.
Bukawela Tudor will deliver the feature address. There will be testimonials from other influen￾tial young people and live entertainment. For information on registration and other details
contact Yvonne Dalton at 111 2615 by December 15, 2005.
The format of the presentation lent itself to better summarising and there was consequently a much higher
average achieved on this question than in previous years.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
Candidates were given a passage from O.R. Dathorne’s Dele’s child and were asked to answer eight questions
on the passage.
(c) was the simplest of the questions requiring only a restatement of the last part of sentence 2 in paragraph 2.
Most candidates had no trouble with this question, even though some thought it necessary to write lengthy
paraphrases.
(a) was also a simple question which could be answered after a first reading of the passage. Only a minority of
candidates had difficulty with this question.
(b) presented most candidates with little difficulty because it involved a straightforward contrast between
sentence 2 and sentence 3.
(d) required candidates to read paragraph 2 and to come up with a word or phrase summarising the narrator’s
state of mind as evidenced in words such as ‘spit at’, ‘hate’, ‘I checked myself suddenly’, ‘viciously’, ‘Damn
them’. Any equivalent of ‘unstable’, ‘resentful’ or ‘bitter’ was acceptable. Many candidates did not understand
the phrase ‘state of mind’.
(e) may initially have seemed difficult, but the repetition of the idea of stillness/quietness no less than five
times in lines 4-7 made the answer relatively simple.
- 9 -
(f) sought to find out whether candidates understood a sentence final comment by the narrator showing the
difference between what was officially announced and the narrator’s view of the matter (that he did not agree
with it). This question proved difficult for most candidates.
(g) required the candidates to identify the narrator’s reaction of hostility or anger to not being remembered.
This partially overlapped with (d). Performance on this question was moderate.
(h) required candidates to identify ‘kind/kindness’ as a word being used sarcastically by the narrator. Most
candidates did not seem to understand what sarcasm meant.
Question 3
Candidates were presented with an argumentative letter written to the editor of the Gleaner newspaper and
asked to answer six questions on it.
(b) and (c) proved straightforward for most candidates. The most superficial reading of the passage would have
allowed candidates to identify the ‘major event’ as a hurricane or more specifically Hurricane Ivan. Question
(c) was based on paragraph 2 which identified ‘laws of physical health’, ‘moral laws’ and ‘environmental
laws’. Candidates variously gave one, two or all three parts in their responses
(a) and (d) were answered by most candidates by directly citing parts of the passage – (a) ‘mankind’s interven￾tions’; (d) ‘The Creator has equipped us with intelligence ... inform ourselves’. While (a) was answered
correctly by most candidates, the reverse was true of (d).
(e) proved to be difficult for many candidates because it required a careful reading of paragraph 3 to work out
the answer rather than just a quotation from the paragraph or a reliance on religious beliefs.
(f) was basically straightforward, but candidates had to identify the ‘object’ precisely (‘hot stove’). Answers
such as ‘hot stove principle’ or ‘stove’ did not get full marks.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
There were several stories of a much higher quality than usual, but the usual weaknesses surfaced in responses
in this section. In the case of Question 4, the picture stimulus, there was the usual problem of concentration on
description of the picture. Yet, there were several good stories given in response. In the case of 5 and 6, there
were too many stories with tenuous connections to the stimulus; and, more generally, there was an inability to
write a short story.
Recommendations for improvement in story writing given elsewhere in this report apply here.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
Performance in this section was much better than in previous years. Candidates seemed to find the topics
familiar and to their liking and therefore produced better arguments. In the case of Question 7, which referred
to “the government”, some candidates took this as an opportunity to attack or defend a political party, accord￾ing to their own political persuasion. In many cases bias prevented candidates from presenting reasoned
arguments. In the case of Question 8 consistency in argument usually provided the critical division between
good and weak answers.
The same recommendations for improvement in argument given elsewhere in this report apply here.
- 10 -
Basic Proficiency
General Comments
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The table below shows the marks assigned to the different papers by profiles.
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
Multiple Essay
Choice
Understanding 60 24 84
Expression – 56 56
 TOTAL 60 80 140
There was a slight increase in the number of candidates taking the examination in 2005:
4,502 (2001) ∅ 3,792 (2002) ∅ 3777 (2003) ∅ 3,063 (2004) ∅ 3,504 (2005).
The statistics show a significant increase in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in
2005:– 16.20 % (2003) ∅ 16.78% (2004) ∅ 29.42% (2005).
The performance mean over the last eight years has been up and down, but in 2005 it was better than the three
previous years:-
(1998) 53.13 – (1999) 51.32 – (2000) 56.57 – (2001) 55.08 – (2002) 49.57 – (2003) 47.17 ∅ (2004)
49.62 ∅ (2005) 52.28.
Detailed Comments
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2005 showed an upward change over 2004. The mean score in 2004,
out of a possible 60, was 25.58 and this moved to 27.84 in 2005.
Paper 02 - Free Response
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows:
2004 2005
Section 1 Summary skills (20 marks) 5.06 5.56
Section 2 Comprehension (24 marks) 9.87 9.93
Section 3 Story Writing (16 marks) 5.17 5.14
Section 4 Argument (20 marks) 5.62 6.90
- 11 -
SECTION ONE (Expression)
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage written in continuous prose. The level of
interpretation of the candidates who attempted this question was poor. Many of them used their personal
experiences to give meaning to the responses. This was probably because they found the passage too difficult.
Indeed very few candidates gave evidence of a clear understanding of the passage. The weaker candidates
showed complete misunderstanding of the passage and wrote responses which demonstrated incompetence. In
addition most candidates presented responses with just sentence fragments and lack of overall cohesiveness.
They displayed lack of organization of material and their sequencing was poor. Many candidates simply repro￾duced the passage while others in their effort to use their own words exceeded the word limit without including
the main points. The relatively few candidates who were able to identify the relevant points were to some
extent able to give reasonable responses to the question. A few demonstrated ability which was seemingly
above the level of Basic Proficiency. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in
continuous prose as in the model below:
Model Answer
When industrialisation started it was marked by terrible working conditions which would be unacceptable
today. Working hours were based on those of peasants and handicraftsmen, the only workers at the time, and
varied between 12 to 14 hours each day. Many of the workers were children who were among the persons who
could most easily leave agriculture.
Inexperienced workers using machinery exposed themselves to the risk of injury. Protective measures were
introduced and improved, recognising the advances in technologies and the importance placed on human life
and safety.
Advice
It is recommended to teachers that they pay particular attention to concord, tense and sentence structure and
reinforce the skills needed in summary writing. Teachers must be aware that in some cases English needs to be
taught as a second language and so second language approaches need to be adopted if there is to be an improve￾ment in the level of results of these candidates.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage in Standard English. It
assessed their ability to use interpretative and analytical skills. (b) posed the greatest difficulty. Most of the
candidates based their answers on the increase on size of the family instead of stating that there was difficulty
in identifying who was related to whom. Candidates also encountered great difficulty in responding to (e).
As was the case in (b), many failed to score in (e). However, (f) proved to be the easiest and most candidates
were able to give the correct response.
- 12 -
Advice
It is recommended that teachers concentrate on teaching comprehension skills, especially inference, with
particular reference to reading material. Candidates need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set
on the paper, questions requiring precise answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure
that candidates read questions a number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the
whole passage, candidates should also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to
make sure that what they are thinking of writing is what the passage says. Candidates should be advised to re￾read what they have written to make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it.
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a persuasive passage written in Standard
English. Most candidates interpreted (c), (e) and (f) satisfactorily but had difficulty with (a), (b) and (d). The
majority of candidates performed best on question (e). Many were also able to answer (c) and (f) correctly. In
question ‘a’ however many candidates thought that ‘Menu Dining and Entertainment Curacao’ was a restaurant
and focussed on getting food. For (b) the majority of candidates did not focus on the word ‘precisely’ and gave
responses like ‘the Caribbean’, ‘locals’, ‘international people’. The overall performance of the candidates
showed an improvement over former years. Most candidates attempted this question and many of them earned
six marks and more. It was encouraging to see so many candidates recognizing the passage as persuasive
writing.
Advice
It is recommended that teachers reinforce the recognition of the different types of writing. More attention needs
to be paid to identifying relevant information relating to particular questions set on chosen passages. Candi￾dates also need to do much more reading. More attention should be paid to spelling and punctuation.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continuous prose. The most
popular question in this section was question 5, but questions 6 and 4 were done by an appreciable number of
candidates. In response to question 4, many candidates wrote descriptively and ignored several elements of
the story. In question 5, generally the sequence of events resulting in the disappearance of the character was
credible. However, there were several stories which had a tenuous link with the stimulus. In question 6 the
interpretation of ‘surprise’ was limited; the majority created ‘birthday surprises’ or the ‘surprise’ of meeting
their father for the first time. In addition to this, there were many stories in which the link with the stimulus was
weak. There were also a few candidates who fused the three topics into one story. There were a few candidates
who demonstrated superiority and many scripts demonstrated competence. The majority of scripts were of the
level of Range 3 (5-8 marks). There were a few in Range 1 where the candidates showed total inability to write
Standard English. Much work needs to be done in developing candidates’ narrative skills. Similarly, structures
of Standard English need to be taught in a systematic way. In very many cases the lack of competence in
Standard English interfered with the story line.
- 13 -
Advice
It is recommended that candidates be encouraged to read more widely in order to develop a richer vocabulary
and so avoid mundane expressions. They need more practice in writing short stories and in incorporating
dialogue in story writing. They should be given more exposure to figurative interpretations. This can be done
by using model short stories and musical ballads. Candidates should be encouraged to edit their work before
they write the final draft.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
This section tested the candidates’ ability to write persuasively and present sound arguments in continuous
Standard English. In question 7 a few candidates took the word ‘argument’ to mean a confrontation between
two persons and so they wrote a dramatic sketch. Many had difficulty dealing with all parts of the stimulus.
Most of these wrote about ‘getting tough’ and ignored the expulsion component. A few wrote about how
candidates should ‘deal with violence’ when other candidates provoked them. Expulsion was often confused
with suspension. Candidates who performed creditably showed an understanding of a good essay format with
an introduction, a body with well-developed paragraphs and a conclusion. These candidates also made use of
various persuasive techniques such as the rhetorical question, repetition, statistical data, authoritative state￾ments, personal appeal and suitable quotations. Weaker candidates were generally unable to clarify a position
in response to the stimulus beyond stating agreement and disagreement. While most of these candidates were
able to make a few relevant statements there was very little evidence of ability to link and develop these ideas.
Very few used paragraphs. Much of the language used was closer to the vernacular than to Standard English.
Poor spelling made words almost impossible to be recognized: ‘schped behavyer’ for stupid behaviour,
‘armynetions’ for ammunition. Most of these candidates were unable to write clear introductions or relevant
conclusions.
Advice
It is recommended that teachers pay greater attention to subject/verb agreement. Candidates must be encour￾aged to use their dictionaries to improve their spelling and vocabulary. They need more practice in logical
development of argument, use of rhetorical questions and appropriate use of figurative language. It is felt too
that candidates should be encouraged to do research on popular topics based on issues on the radio and the
news-papers. Candidates need to be given many opportunities to write. Debates and discussions provide op￾portunity for candidates to practice expressing opinion. Reading West Indian literature that uses the vernacular
and discussing the difference between this and Standard English can develop the candidates’ ability to distin￾guish between the two. Candidates need more practice in the use of topic sentences and paragraphs.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2006
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2006 Caribbean Examinations Council ®.
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2006
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
The examination in 2006 was the first year the revised syllabus was assessed. Paper 01, the multiple choice
paper, tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper,
tested the Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and
persuasive writing. In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story writing and
description. The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two
papers is as follows:-
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
 Multiple Essay
 Choice
Understanding 60*46+ 40*30+ 76+ = 40%
Expression – 90*114+ 114+ = 60%
* raw score
+ weighted mark
The statistics this year have to be read more carefully because of the changes in the marks allotted and the
changes in the weighting in Paper 02.
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows:
——— ——— ——— ———
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 125) for 2003-2005 and (out of a total of 190*)
for 2006 is as follows:
(2003)50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (2006) 41.51
Average performance over the last four years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks
is as follows:
——— ——— ——— ———
2005
52.70
2006
48.54
2004
49.60
2003
49.53
2005
33.67
2006
32.36
2004
33.09
2003
34.63
- 3 -
Average performance (2003-2005) in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is given below.
Average performance in 2006 is given out of 25 for comparison with previous years and also out of the
relevant 2006 totals.
2003 2004 2005 2006
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 8.66/10.40 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 10.85/12.15 (28)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description 8.84 8.79 9.70 10.22/14.31 (35)
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 9.75/13.65 (35)
There was improvement in performance in Section 2 (Comprehension) and Section 3 (Story Writing/
Description).
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language examination
and that candidates must, above all, demonstrate competence in and control of the English language. The
fundamental preparation for the examination is that candidates should develop high-level skills, both passive
(comprehension) and productive (expression) in the English language. These skills must be demonstrated in
all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and commas, but also the not so frequently
used ones such as colons, semi-colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas,
upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling,
proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages
and in advertisements is not acceptable in this examination.
Students should come to the exam with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question, that is, identifying
the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy, producing a fair copy. This is especially important in
writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers
should advise each student, based on the student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough
copy to a fair copy under CXC examination conditions. Teachers should give students specific instructions
about deleting and editing in order that markers can read and understand what the candidate intended without
undue difficulty.
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced verbatim by the candidate, CXC markers are
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates.
Some of the better candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings
or insert extraneous material. This is penalised. Therefore, those candidates who are seeking to achieve full
marks or high marks should make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original.
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are asked.
For example, instructions sometimes say ‘give a word’; at other times they say ‘give a phrase’; at other times
still they say ‘give a clause’. In each case candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give.
Candidates need to read and re-read the questions themselves as well as the passages on which the questions
are set. Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to
- 4 -
a question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy,
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer.
In Section 3 many candidates are exceeding the suggested length for the short story and though excess is not
penalized in the marking in this case, spending too much time on one question can affect performance in
others. Every candidate doing this examination should have read the best story from preceding years in order
to get a sense of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC). These stories, however,
should not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. Although the question paper states word
limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the better students tend to write stories that fall
within or not too far out of the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be
rambling, out of control and weak. Often too, students who write excessively long stories have insufficient
time left to complete the paper properly. Teachers are encouraged to help their students to plan their stories,
focus on building plots, intensifying conflict, creating a good sense of character, instead of merely relating
one or a string of events. Candidates should not memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating
escapes the attention of the examiners.
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and presentation
of sound points, supported by suitable examples. Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure
they understand key words, then select their points, choose examples that corroborate their points and be
consistent and clear in their presentation. For some inexplicable reason, some candidates operate on the
assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not,
they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as
to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than
if they merely agree with what they think is the examiners’ views.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression)
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read a passage taken from a newsletter and to summarise in no more
than 120 words the major factors which contribute to the disadvantages encountered by women in the labour
market . Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose.
According to the passage, the major factors contributing to disadvantages are:
• limited access to stable and well paid employment
• inability to pay for public education/training
• inability to qualify for entry to training
• choice of ‘feminine’ and non-technical fields in training
• socio-cultural factors in the attitudes of key people
• private sector training that possibly reinforces gender roles and biases.
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ
but still give the critical information needed:
- 5 -
(1) Many factors contribute to the disadvantages encountered by women in the labour market. Women have
limited access to stable, well-paid employment and are confined to ‘feminine’ work. In vocational
courses women opt for less technical fields which narrow their opportunities. Women are also faced
with the attitudes of employers and society itself when they seek employment. This is due to socio￾cultural factors. In poor countries, women are disadvantaged in secondary or tertiary education
because of entrance requirements or the cost of courses. Although numerous programmes are put in
place by non-governmental organizations, they do not look at the impact of this training due to lack of
monitoring and reporting. Such programmes may reinforce existing gender roles and biases. [118
words]
(2) Though women have increasing opportunity to earn income, they are still disadvantaged economically,
being mostly restricted to low-level, low-paying jobs. Contributing factors include low female enrolment
in the technical-vocational areas that pay well. Females make some poor choices in areas of study
because of their own values. They are influenced by other negative social attitudes towards various
areas of employment. Another factor is that the school system does not help already disadvantaged
girls to reach the entry requirements for technical training nor can they pay the high costs. Informal
training is provided by private companies, but the quality of this training is not monitored, and it may
only serve to maintain a negative situation. [114 words]
(3) The main factors that contribute to the disadvantages found by women in the world of work are
educational and social. In relation to formal education and training, many women in most parts of the
world cannot afford or do not qualify for entry to post-primary institutions. Those who do often
restrict themselves to non-technical “feminine” subjects. This practice is reinforced by society and
helps to limit the women in their job choices. Non-formal training is available in private institutions,
but the courses in these situations are inadequately monitored and might reinforce the negative attitudes
and gender issues that are already contributing to the disadvantages faced by these women in the
arena of work. [113 words]
Performance on Question 1 this year was just marginally below last year’s. There are still too many presumably
genuine attempts which pay absolutely no attention to the word limit given. Some candidates operate with the
casual assumption that excess will be overlooked in all answers. This absolutely does not apply to Question
1. As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage of varying lengths verbatim, or paraphrased them
indiscriminately. Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without
any injection of extraneous material, that is, material not found in the passage.
Advice
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should:
(i) remind students to observe the stated length.
(ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that
students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical.
(iii) help students to recognise the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills
(comprehension and composition skills)
(iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:-
a) using one’s own words as far as possible
b) using plain English with clarity and conciseness
- 6 -
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and situation/
context
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading
e) observing correct mechanics of the language
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is
expected that students have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some questions
require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, students should know how to select word or phrases (as
required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question asks: if it requires ‘a
word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an indication that the student
does not know exactly what the answer is. This is a recurrent problem which is likely to be the kind that would
respond to more oral and written practice in class with immediate feedback and discussion.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of ideas expressed in a narrative passage, a
selection from Michael Anthony’s “Pita of the Deep Blue Sea”. The following were deemed to be the correct
answers:
(a) Pita/the fish
(b) fast moving action; suspense; tension
(c) panic; anxiety; frustration; desperation
(d) to show the tremendous effort being made to escape
(e) the net
(f) because that is where the fate of the fish was decided, where death took place
(g) he was now free
(h) it was the sound of the place where he would have died
(a) This question was answered correctly by most candidates. The initial difficulty which candidates had
to overcome was that the fish was given a name. Where candidates did not come to terms with this, the
passage as a whole was not well understood.
(b) This question was not answered correctly by most candidates. It is the type of question which reflects
the level of instruction candidates received, since it deals with a writer’s craft.
(c) This question did not present great difficulty to most candidates. However, some candidates answered
the question with words that were extreme or too vague.
(d) It was not satisfactory to make a general statement, that is, that ‘repeat’ means ‘emphasis’. Candidates
needed to explain this specific situation. Candidates had to demonstrate that they understood the
passage.
- 7 -
(e) As in (a), candidates had to interpret the element of personification/animation correctly. Many candidates
were unable to do this.
(f) Some candidates interpreted ‘fateful’ as “faithful’.
(g) This question did not present great difficulty to most candidates.
(h) This proved a difficult question for most candidates. Candidates needed to formulate their answers
based on an understanding of the whole passage.
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward in an article extracted
from Time magazine. The following were deemed to be the correct answers:
(a) The debate is ‘Can people be overweight but still healthy?’
(b) The phrase suggests that most people are involved in the debate or that the debate is worldwide.
Alternatively, the phrase gives weight to the issue or shows the importance of it.
(c) The impression that the writer wants to convey is that people take sides or that people hold
strongly to particular views or that there are conflicting views.
(d) The writer uses the word ‘however’ to point out that other persons hold a contrasting view.
(e) The most important point in the last paragraph is that fitness and size are equally important.
(f) Two factors are people should eat well and people should exercise regularly.
(g) [As a result of confusion about the numbering of paragraphs, this question was removed from
the examination and not marked]
(h) The writer is referring to fitness proponents.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) As usual, the word ‘effect’ was beyond the competence of the majority of candidates.
(c) In this case, the word ‘impression’ did not constitute any major difficulty. Most candidates were able
to formulate satisfactory answers to this question.
(d) Most candidates understood that ‘however’ introduced a contrast and were able to formulate a correct
answer.
(e) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(f) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(h) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
- 8 -
Advice
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond literal interpretations. In the
explanation of literary devices and specific phrases/sentences used by writers, candidates have to be accurate
and precise in their answers. Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which
rarely conceal ignorance.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterisation, good and effective use of details to create
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving like
reports, with weak language. There were several students who attempted to use words and structures with
which they were not familiar. The result was that what they wrote was often verbose, sometimes unintelligible
in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the simplicity of
language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling based, for
instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting class productions
– for listening, writing and peer interaction.
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked
appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must be
linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive
interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. Choice of features
to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. Description,
even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.)
must be clearly established. If characters are being described, they must be sufficiently developed. Dialogue,
when used, should be functional (e.g. to develop character, atmosphere, mood, etc.) There should be varied
and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create characters,
moods, tones, atmosphere and setting.
A specific problem which arose this year is that a vast number of candidates did not seem to be aware of the
change made to Section 3, which now asked for a description in Question 6. Since this may not have been the
fault of the candidates themselves and it is possible that in spite of the long lead time given they were not
informed and prepared by their teachers, it was decided not to penalise candidates who wrote a story in answer
to Question 6. This concession will not be repeated next year.
There were not many problems with Question 4. It produced a range of responses with several that were
mainly descriptions. However, most candidates were able to integrate the picture into a story. Most candidates
wrote stories with a theme of a lost son or daughter. Several stories described the old woman, her condition
and circumstances and then developed the plot.
Question 5 was a popular choice, but it produced a preponderance of mediocre stories with hardly any superior
writing. It encouraged candidates to create humour which sometimes was not more than simplistic. Many
responses to Question 5 merely had the stimulus quotation tacked on and not satisfactorily integrated into the
plot.
In the case of Question 6, a great number of candidates proceeded to write a response without reading the
instructions carefully. In the relevant responses to this question, various situations were created – a person
returning home from abroad, a person returning after many years, a person coming to the scene after a disaster
and many others. The good responses to this question used details to create pictures of the environment, made
comparisons or reflections that justified the comment “... she felt like she was in another country” and expressed
- 9 -
thoughts and feelings suited to the situation. Although the question itself assisted with what should be described
– “what she saw and her thoughts and feelings”, many students did not follow the instructions of the question.
Advice
Use more and varied pictures to help stimulate and guide writing. This would help to stimulate classroom
writing e.g. help students focus on use of details to create character, emotion, atmosphere, etc. The creation of
humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing classes – how to tell a joke,
how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story-writing that might interest even reluctant
writers. How to use language effectively to do all this e.g. use of short sentences and exclamation marks for
effect could be a natural way of calling attention to form.
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. A lot more
story reading in preference to talking about story-writing elements. Candidates whose stories are impressive
are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. Training in short story writing
must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading.
SECTION FOUR (Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
A majority of the candidates chose Question 8, while Question 7 was challenging for many who did it. In
relation to the former, some candidates lambasted the Minister of Education instead of taking a stance, giving
solid and strong arguments, expanding the arguments, sustaining a position and employing argumentative
techniques. In relation to Question 7, too many responses lacked substance and information from which
candidates could argue. Those who performed well on this topic most likely had the advantage of knowledge
from Social Studies and were current with topical issues such as C(aribbean) S(ingle) M(arket) and E(conomy).
Unfortunately, many candidates had no knowledge of Caricom as a regional institution and thus could not
argue about what the ‘movement of skilled professionals’ could mean for the region.
In general, candidates who displayed superiority understood the demands of the topic, identified their audience,
cogently presented their points and argued effectively using appropriate devices. Competent candidates
demonstrated some ability to raise points, but faltered on argumentation. Weak responses came from candidates
who had little or only vague knowledge of the topic and lacked the skills of argumentation.
Advice
Students need to be guided about the difference between ‘arguing’ and ‘quarrelling’. Students should be
warned against making unsubstantiated, partisan political statements in an essay that requires logical arguments
illustrated with relevant examples.
Basic Proficiency
GENERAL COMMENTS
The examination in 2005 followed the format used in previous years. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper,
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of literary and persuasive writing.
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Understanding and Expression) across the two papers is as
follows:-
- 10 -
PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL
 Multiple Essay
 Choice
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression – 65 65 = 40%
There was a decrease in the number of candidates taking the examination in 2006:
4,502(2001) 3,792(2002) 3,777 (2003) 3,063 (2004) 3,063 (2005) 3,089 (2006).
There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2006:
16.20%(2003) 16.78%(2004) 29.42%(2005) 26.51%(2006).
The performance mean over the last nine years has been up and down, but in 2006 it was better than most of
the previous years:
(1998) 53.13 – (1999) 51.32 – (2000) 56.57 – (2001) 55.08 – (2002) 49.57 – (2003) 47.17 (2004) 49.62 (2005)
52.28 (2006) 56.13 [actually 60.14 out of 150].
Not enough students are demonstrating competence in Profile II (expression). Students seem oblivious to
spelling rules and their spelling is particularly weak and increasingly phonetic. The concept of paragraphing is
ignored and, generally, punctuation is limited to full stops and commas.
There is increasing evidence that some candidates are short of ideas or material. For instance, some candidates
used the passage in Question 1 as a response to Question 7 or in support of the moot in Question 8 and some
candidates used Question 2 as material to answer Section III.
Detailed Comments
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2006 showed an upward change over 2005. The mean score in 2005,
out of a possible 60, was 27.84 and this moved to 28.14 in 2006.
- 11 -
Paper 02 - Free Response
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows:
2004 2005 2006
Section 1 Summary skills (20 marks) 5.06 5.56 4.78/7.17 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension (24 marks) 9.87 9.93 10.99/12.36 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description (16 marks) 5.17 5.14 5.32/6.65 (20)
Section 4 Argument (20 marks) 5.62 6.9 6.90/8.62 (25)
* Under 2006 the mark given first is for purposes of comparison with previous years and the second mark
given is the actual average of out the 2006 totals for each section.
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression)
Question 1 tested the candidates’ ability to summarise a passage written in continuous prose taken from the
San Juan Star newspaper. The passage examined the link between media violence and children’s behaviour.
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ
but still give the critical information needed:
1. Studies show that violence in the electronic media is linked to violence in society. Children exposed to
such violence may imitate the acts and the actors who commit them. Consequently, their minds are
becoming seriously affected as they begin to see life as an exciting game, not as reality. Parents do not
always fully understand how damaging these violent acts are. Parents, therefore, should be more
attentive to these shows and discuss them with their children. [76 words]
2. Studies show a link between children’s behaviours and the violence and aggression they are exposed
to via television, movies and video games. These studies are important because, to deal effectively
with the problem, we have to understand it thoroughly. Constant exposure to violence and aggression
causes children to imitate these behaviours and view them as normal – even exciting! Parents don’t
realize how awful some video games are. They need to be more vigilant and talk to their children,
many of whom see life as a game. Some don’t even know what is real and what is not. [97 words]
3. Studies show a link between children’s behaviours and the violence and aggression they are exposed
to via audio-visual and interactive media. This exposure causes children to admire and imitate acts of
aggression and violence. In fact, it makes them see life as a game and some cannot tell the difference
between fantasy and reality. Parents and adults do not realise how awful video games are. They need
to be more aware and discuss the negative content with their children. We need to understand the
problem thoroughly so that we can deal with it effectively. [94 words]
Too many students exceeded the word limit. Too many students were unable to use their own words in their
attempt to summarise the passage. Many merely lifted parts of the passage and combined these to form a
summary. A few candidates responded to the topic at an emotional level and were very forthright in expressing
their views. The result was more an argument than a summary and therefore provided no basis for assessment
of summary skills.
- 12 -
Advice
Exercises in summary writing should include passages that are contentious in their subject matter. In such
cases, students should be taught to remain calm in the face of arguments they do not agree with and to summarise
the argument given rather than to respond to it.
In order to help students express themselves logically and concisely, teachers should provide students with
ample exercises in making construction shifts and in recognising and writing equivalent sentences. Students
should be encouraged to constantly review the collective nouns they have learnt from primary school and to
enrich their vocabulary by regular reading of good literature. One way of doing this would be to have a
classroom book club.
SECTION TWO (Understanding)
Question 2
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand a prose passage written in Standard English
taken from Nailah Folami Imoja’s Pick of the Crop. It assessed their ability to use interpretative and analytical
skills. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions asked:
(a) Leroi had to stay humble because his mother reprimanded him if he wasn’t.
(b) Ma regarded him as his own man; she stopped sitting by the door; she stopped waiting up for
him when he went out.
(c) Her reward was that he could stay at home for as long as he chose.
(d) Ma lay in bed awake at night because she was waiting for Leroi to come home.
(e) The phrase tells us that he was respectful towards his mother and didn’t want to offend her.
(f) Her opinion was that he was a good boy – he wouldn’t curse for her to hear.
The overall performance on this question was encouraging. Students performed well on questions which
required a grasp of explicit statements made in the passage (a, b, c, d), but showed some difficulty with
questions which required them to draw conclusions or make inferences (e, f) about opinions and attitudes.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(c) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(d) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(e) Many candidates had difficulty understanding and explaining ‘attitude’.
(f) Many candidates had difficulty formulating a response to the question of ‘opinion of’.
- 13 -
Advice
It is recommended that teachers concentrate on teaching comprehension skills, especially inference, with
particular reference to reading material. Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set
on the paper, questions requiring precise answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure
that students read questions a number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the
whole passage, students should also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to
make sure that what they are thinking of writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re￾read what they have written to make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it.
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ ability to read and understand an argumentative passage written in Standard
English published in The Barbados Advocate newspaper. The following were deemed to be the correct answers
to the questions asked:
(a) The writer makes the comment because of the variety and quantity of cell phones available
and abused in public.
(b) The writer’s view of such people is that they are inconsiderate.
(c) The writer’s opinion is that people use cell phones in public to show off.
(d) The writer makes the comment because nowadays everybody has a cell phone.
(e) He refers to them as culprits because their cell phones rang at inappropriate moments and
they answered them.
(f) Two developments the writer is predicting are that new annoying traits will emerge and that
the situation will get even worse.
(g) The effect that the writer expects it to have is to cause the person not to use the cell phone
inappropriately in public.
(a) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(b) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(c) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(d) Candidates had little difficulty here because they could quote the answer from the text.
(e) The word ‘culprit’ was not generally understood. Many answers failed to mention the idea of
‘inappropriate moments’.
(f) This proved a little more difficult than the first four because the answer was not restricted to one
sentence.
(g) Many answers did not deal with the writer’s expectation or intention.
- 14 -
Advice
In order to master this section, students should be given practice in being specific when answering questions.
There is no need to write an answer of half a page for a question that is worth two marks. Various strategies
should be employed to develop analytical skills in order to answer question which require more than just
quoting from the passage. Teachers need to get students to understand what is meant by the writer’s expectation,
intention, opinion and attitude and to realise that responses of this type require more than quoting from the
passage, they require summarising and explanation.
SECTION THREE (Expression)
Questions 4, 5 & 6
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express themselves creatively in continuous prose. Instead of all
of the questions requiring a story, this year this section included a question (Question 5) which tested candidates’
ability to write a descriptive essay.
Question 6 was the most popular choice. In Question 4 many candidates simply described the picture while
others wrote stories which had a tenuous link with the picture. Question 5 posed the greatest challenge with
respect to interpretation. In several ‘descriptions’ ‘Al’ appeared only at the end, while in others he was nowhere
in the scene.
An appreciable number of students demonstrated competence in employing all the elements of story writing:
strong plots, good use of imagination, well-rounded characterization, appropriate resolution of conflict,
satisfactory conclusion of action, skilful selection of details and effective use of dialogue. There were a few
superior scripts. However, the majority of students continue to find this section a major challenge and some do
not even attempt any of the three questions. Weak responses included unimaginative ‘stories’ which were a
mere relation of loosely connected incidents. Other weaknesses included the following:
• Shift in perspective from first to third person and vice versa.
• Lack of or inadequate characterization
• Sudden appearance of characters; change of main character
• Underdeveloped stories
• Restricted vocabulary, faulty syntax and weak mechanics
• Stories far in excess of or below the suggested word limit.
Advice
Students should be provided with copious models of good short stories and should be taught the elements of
story writing in a systematic way. After this they should be given regular practice in writing short stories using
various stimuli. Students should be encouraged to read more widely in order to develop a more varied vocabulary.
They should be given more exposure to figurative expressions. They need more practice in incorporating
dialogue in story writing. Students should be encouraged to edit their work before they write the final draft.
- 15 -
SECTION FOUR(Expression)
Questions 7 & 8
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on a given topic while Question 8 required them to
defend a position.
Candidates seemed to have no particular difficulty relating to the topics given. Generally the supporting
details were pertinent to the topics. For example, candidates showed a clear understanding of the academic
underachievement of Caribbean male youth (Question 7) as well as an awareness of the sometimes harsh
realities of parenting (Question 8). Responses to Question 8, which was the more frequently answered question,
focussed on either the negative socio-economic challenges of having more than two children or the sanction
from God to “be fruitful and multiply”. Because both Question 7 and Question 8 were in two parts, in responding,
some candidates lost sight of the full argument and addressed only one part of the issue.
Weak responses ignored the use of punctuation and/or paragraphing, listed points rather than explain, expand
or illustrate them, did not adhere to logical sequencing and used transitional words and phrases inappropriately.
Some otherwise competent responses included slang words and expressions and MSN (computer) spellings.
Advice
Teachers are encouraged to continue to provide classroom activities for students to practice persuasive skills
orally. They should encourage students to ‘translate’ popular slang expressions and should use ‘teachable
moments’ to underscore the concept of appropriate use of language. They should also reinforce the conventions
of writing Standard English. Interesting newspaper editorials could be used for class discussions. This would
also help to develop students’ analytical thinking and ability to respond concisely to higher order questions
posed in Section 2. Students need more practice in logical development of argument, use of rhetorical questions
and appropriate use of figurative language. Students need to be given many opportunities to write. Students
need more practice in the use of topic sentences and paragraphs. Students would benefit from timed practice
exercises in preparation for the examination.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE 
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS 
MAY/JUNE 2007 
ENGLISH A 
Copyright © 2007 Caribbean Examinations Council ® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
- 2 -
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS 
MAY/JUNE 2007
GENERAL COMMENTS 
General Proficiency
The examination in 2007 was the second year for the revised syllabus. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, 
tested most of the Understanding component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the 
Expression component of the syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and 
persuasive writing. In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story writing and 
description. The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two 
papers is as follows:- 
 
Paper 01 
Multiple Choice
Paper 02 
Essay
Total
Understanding 60* = 46 + 40* = 30 + 76 + = 40%
Expression - 90* = 114+ 114 + = 60%
Total 46 + 144 + 190 + = 100%
 * raw score 
 + computed score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows: 
 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 
 49.53 49.60 52.70 50.96 49.01 
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 125) for 2003-2005 and (out of a total of 190*) 
for 2006 and 2007 is as follows: 
(2003) 50.62 (2004) 50.74 (2005) 52.76 (2006) 79.14 (2007) 77.94 
 Average performance over the last five years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
 34.63 33.09 33.67 32.36 30.55 
Average performance (2003-2005) in the component sections of Paper 02 (all out of 25 marks) is given 
below. Average performance in 2006 and 2007 is given out of the relevant totals. 
- 3 -
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Section 1 Summary skills 8.20 9.23 8.80 10.40 (30) 10.04 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 8.22 9.30 9.16 12.58 (28) 15.45 (29)
Section 3 Story Writing 
Description 
8.84 8.79 9.70 14.31 (35) 13.62 (35) 
 10.63 (35)
Section 4 Argument 9.29 8.66 10.54 13.65 (35) 13.74 (35)
General advice 
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language 
examination and that candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and productive (expression), in the English language. In the examination, 
these skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and 
commas, but also the not so frequently used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other 
conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of 
numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence structure and paragraphing. The 
kind of writing that has become popular in e-mail messages and text messaging is not acceptable in 
this examination. 
Students should come to the examination with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question. In 
accordance with the concept of writing as a process (abbreviated under examination conditions), candidates 
should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a 
rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, in doing a 
description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each student, 
based on the student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy under 
CXC examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting and editing so that the appearance of their 
work is not off-putting to examiners. Though examiners have to make a great effort to decipher every word 
that some candidates have written, candidates should never forget that it is their own responsibility to write 
legibly. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed the 
public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one’s ability 
to perform in the world of work. Consequently, it is not advantageous to treat English language as merely an 
academic subject or as a subject for “nerds”. 
Specific advice on the sections of Paper 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers are 
instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates to use 
their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters, policemen and 
CEOs reporting to their board of directors) and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings or 
- 4 -
insert extraneous material. This is penalised. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt to 
mislead or deceive or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. So, those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
In assessing Question 1, the examiners (keeping in mind the specified word limit) pay specific attention to 
the candidate’s ability to use his/her own language, the accuracy and coverage of the major points and the 
ability to connect the main points to make the answer read smoothly. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, 
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates’ responsibility to 
indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of 
possibilities given by the candidate. 
This section requires candidates to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that they have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some questions 
require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, candidates should know how to select word or phrases 
(as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also candidates need to do as the question asks: if it 
requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong - it is an indication 
that the candidates does not know exactly what the answer is. 
 In the preparation for Section 3 every candidate should have read the best story from preceding years in
order to get a sense of what is required. (These ‘Best Stories’ are available from CXC.) These stories should 
not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not memorise 
published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
 Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better candidates tend to write stories that fall within or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that stretch 
into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create 
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving 
like reports, with weak language. Candidates should try to improve their own techniques of story writing, 
including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good stories written 
by Caribbean authors.
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes 
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the 
simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story-telling 
based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting 
class productions - for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Since the descriptive essay is a new option in this section, greater attention should be paid to it. Description 
must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked appropriately). 
Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must be linked 
appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive 
interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. Choice of 
features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. 
Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, 
mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of language to create 
- 5 -
picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and setting. 
- 6 -
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Candidates should pay attention to ‘tone’ and 
‘audience’ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Candidates 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspapers as well as 
short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some 
unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must 
agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, 
that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiners’ view. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
General Proficiency 
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
Question 1 
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from a popular magazine 
dealing with the history and significance of tattoos and other forms of body markings over the centuries. 
Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous prose in no more than 120 
words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
• Tattoos are permanent markings which have been around from the beginning of civilization. 
• They were brought to the Caribbean from Africa, China and India, but the Amerindians wore them 
even before. 
• They were used by people in the Caribbean for religious, ethnic and cultural purposes. 
• Over the years they came to be personal expressions identified with rebellion and deviance. 
• Attitudes have changed towards tattoos and today they have become acceptable as marks of 
uniqueness and difference. 
Following are three excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
(1) From the beginning of civilization tattoos and other body markings have been marks of 
identification, spiritual protection and decoration. Tattoos are permanent markings which vary 
greatly and can be personally very revealing. A tattoo is an instant of your life etched forever on you 
for the world to see. 
 Tattoos and other body markings were characteristic of the Amerindians of the Caribbean as well as 
of the Africans, Chinese and Indians who came here. For all these people, they had cultural, 
spiritual and ethnic significance. Over the centuries, tattoos and other body markings have changed 
back and forth from group significance to individual significance, presenting a daily image of 
difference and uniqueness. (112 words) 
(2) Tattoos have been around from the beginning of time and were used originally as identification marks, 
spiritual protection and decoration, but now they are a popular form of self expression. Tattoos are 
permanent markings on the body which were brought to the Caribbean by slaves from Africa and 
indentured labourers from China and India, but were also used earlier by Amerindians. 
- 7 -
 Over the years tattoos have changed from being positive to negative, often being confused with 
rebellion and deviance (non-conformity). Today, tattoos are once again seen as something positive: 
they are worn by people from all walks of life, on all parts of their body, saying to the world it's all 
right to be different. (115 words) 
 (3) Tattoos have been around from the earliest of times for identification as well as for spiritual and 
decorative purposes. They are more unique and permanent than other symbols and ornaments and 
can be seen by everyone. 
 Tattoos and other body markings came to the Caribbean from Africa, China and India with slaves 
and indentured workers. Indigenous people also used tattoos for spiritual, cultural and personal 
reasons and to indicate social status. 
 Over time, tattoos displayed more personal expressions and were perceived by some to display anti￾social or deviant behaviour. Today, however, tattoos have re-emerged as signs of personal 
expression, have gained respectability and are linked with cultural and social identity and 
individuality and not merely with style. (116 words) 
Performance on Question 1 this year was about the same as last year, revealing the same strengths and 
weaknesses in candidates’ answers. There were too many candidates who did not observe the word limit 
given. Among these, some seemed to operate with the casual assumption that excess would be overlooked in 
all answers, while a few attempted to deceive the examiners by putting an incorrect number of words at the 
end of their answer. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim or paraphrased them 
indiscriminately. Candidates who approached summary writing as a deletion exercise often ended up having 
sentences or pieces of sentences which were improperly connected to what preceded, were inaccurate or 
incoherent. This was especially so in relation to paragraph three, which dealt with the different ethnic 
groups. 
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to bring different sentences and paragraphs together by the use of 
appropriate connectives and to cover all the main points. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
(i) remind students to observe the stated length. 
(ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that 
students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
(iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills 
(comprehension and composition skills) 
(iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
 a) using one’s own words as far as possible 
 b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
 c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
 d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
 e) observing correct mechanics of the language 
- 8 -
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
Performance in this section improved over last year with many candidates getting full or nearly full marks. 
There were no specific questions that candidates found particularly difficult, except for 2 (f). There were still 
a number of candidates who found it difficult to answer the question and stop, but felt the need to go on to 
write paragraph-long answers. 
Question 2 
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage taken from Noel Woodroffe’s 
Wing’s Way . The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set: 
(a) Dawn; Midday; Evening 
(b) fish/ nets; cooking; oil 
(c) the flares of the oil refinery 
a huge red ball (1 mark) 
(d) (the kind of death) found in the eyes of broken, old men 
 (the kind of death) found on abandoned coasts ... 
 the hopelessness of this backwater village 
(e) climbed 
(f) An answer which suggested struggle and difficulty 
(g) The weight of the cars on the sun-softened pitch 
(h) backwater village; missed and ignored; hopelessness of this backwater; swept clean of talent and 
vitality; dependent upon a stony earth and dwindling oil; vision of a hopeless future. 
Since 2 (f) required candidates to go beyond quoting from the passage and to construct the answer based on 
an understanding of the passage, this question was generally not well done. In many cases, it was clear that 
candidates were unable to follow the thread of meaning (as in the second paragraph of the passage) when 
sentences were beyond a certain length. 
 Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a view put forward about the ‘generation 
gap’ in an article extracted from Time magazine. The following were deemed to be the correct answers: 
(a) a large amount 
(b) the child has adult concerns; the child wants a lot of privacy; the child no longer trusts the goodwill 
of parents 
(c) not fixed; not forever; can be reversed; variable 
(d) the child’s brain has matured; the child is capable of more independent judgement 
(e) parents 
(f) (i) their powerful feelings/their social lives/social power 
 (ii) power/opinion of other boys/anxiety about masculinity 
- 9 -
(g) they still need their mothers; even though bigger than her, they have to obey her 
(h) but 
 In response to a question as uncomplicated as 3 (a) for which candidates had to construct an answer using 
their own words, what several candidates wrote was either vague, misleading or inaccurate. This was also 
the case with answers to 3 (c). 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond the literal, to make logical 
judgements and to express these accurately. 
 Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which rarely conceal ignorance. 
 Teachers should bear in mind that, in any one year, more questions like 2 (f) may occur on the examination 
paper and fewer which require direct citation from the passage. The incidence of particular question types 
will vary according to the selections the examiners make to ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers 
should therefore familiarise themselves with this section of the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to 
make sure that they provide practice for students in all the question types specified in the syllabus. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
 Questions 4, 5 and 6 
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a man showed some measure of 
distress. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the dramatic line The phone rang once 
and stopped. It rang again. This was it now. Question 6 required that candidates write a descriptive essay 
asking candidates to describe what some astronauts saw as they landed. 
Question 6 was the least popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 10% of the candidates) and 
also the one least well done on average. Question 5 was the most popular (attempted by 52%) with Question 
4 in between (attempted by 34%). Question 5 produced the best story for 2007. The overall performance on 
this section was not as good as last year. 
Question 4 produced many responses dealing with the Iraq war or with disasters of Muslims/Arabs in 
various parts of the world. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture quite well into the story and 
many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 produced a variety of stories, some very well done and others which paid little attention to the 
significance of This was it now in the rubric. Even though most responses did not capture the idea of a pre￾arranged signal, there was some element of panic or dreaming that allowed for a reasonable interpretation of 
the stimulus. As usual, many responses to this question had the stimulus quotation inserted without 
satisfactory integration into the plot. 
In the case of Question 6, a great number of candidates, as was the case last year, wrote responses without 
reading the instructions carefully. Some of the responses suggest that candidates were unfamiliar with 
description and had had no practice dealing with it. In the relevant responses to this question, some 
candidates wrote about what the astronauts saw while landing on another planet, while others wrote on what 
they saw on returning to Earth. Weaker candidates found difficulty limiting themselves to describing what 
the astronauts saw as they landed and included in their responses a narration of the previous and subsequent 
travels of the astronauts. 
- 10 -
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers should treat Section Three as having two sections - two questions requiring short stories and 
one question requiring a descriptive essay. 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing 
classes - how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story-writing 
that might interest even reluctant writers. How to use language effectively to do all this, for example, use of 
short sentences and exclamation marks for effect could be a natural way of calling attention to form. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. Candidates 
whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. 
Training in short story writing must always stress the process of thinking, drafting, editing and proof 
reading. 
Students should be explicitly made familiar with the difference between narrative and descriptive writing. 
Students should imagine themselves using a camera and describing what they see through the lens as they 
move the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary for teachers to 
get students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking 
adjectives and adverbs, students should be wary about memorising flowery phrases and sticking them willy￾nilly into descriptive essays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus specifically 
on vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and another of 
adverbs and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. Teachers need 
to make these lists cover all the senses - sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
Questions 7 and 8 
Question 7 asked candidates to present an argument for or against the use of cellular phones in school. 
Question 8 asked candidates to express their views on the topic Popular music and dance on display in the 
Caribbean today are corrupting the youth and making them irresponsible . Both these questions were within 
the immediate interest and current knowledge of candidates and candidates did not demonstrate any 
significant difference in preference for the one or the other. Even so, performance in this section this year 
was not significantly higher than last year. 
Question 7 seemed to have been predicted and was practised in many schools throughout the region. This 
resulted in well-rehearsed answers in terms of points given for or against the proposition. The better 
responses to this question displayed good argumentative techniques/rhetorical devices. In addition, they 
anticipated the arguments on the other side and countered them satisfactorily. 
 Responses to Question 8 too often failed to examine and demonstrate the cause/effect relationship between
music/dance and corrupt, indisciplined youth. They merely asserted that music and dance are a corrupting 
force and that the youth of today are corrupt. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
While it is necessary to keep abreast of topics of local interest, students also need to read and discuss in class 
wider or international topics because it is not always that topics close to their immediate and current 
experience will be given in this section. 
- 11 -
Students need constant practice in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by contrast’, ‘accordingly’ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Basic Proficiency 
The examination in 2007 was the second year for the revised syllabus. However, this examination is due to 
be discontinued after next year. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, tested most of the Understanding 
component of the syllabus and Paper 02, the free response paper, tested the Expression component of the 
syllabus as well as part of the Understanding of summary, literary and persuasive writing. The distribution of 
marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is as follows:- 
Paper 01 
Multiple Choice 
Paper 02 
Essay
Total
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression - 65 65 = 40%
Total 60 102 162 = 100%
The number of candidates taking the examination in 2007 declined significantly when compared with 
previous years: 
 3,473 (2005) → 3,504 (2006) → 2755 (2007). 
 There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2007: 
 29.42% (2005) → 26.51% (2006) → 25.01% (2007). 
The performance mean in 2007 was lower than in 2005 and 2006: 
(2005) 52.28 (=37%) → (2006) 60.14 (= 37%) → (2007) 57.65 (=36%). 
 DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 - Multiple Choice
Candidates’ performance in Paper 01 in 2007 showed a decline when compared with 2005 and 2006. The 
mean score in 2005, out of a possible 60, was 27.84; this moved to 28.14 in 2006 and 27.43 in 2007. 
Paper 02 - Free Response 
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows (The numbers in brackets are 
the maximum totals for the respective questions): 
- 12 -
2004 2005 2006 2007
Section 1 Summary skills 5.06 (20) 5.56 (20) 7.17 (30) 7.35 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 9.87 (24) 9.93 (24) 12.36 (27) 12.93 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/ Description 5.17 (16) 5.14 (16) 6.65 (20) 6.29 (20)/5.20 (20)
Section 4 Argument 5.62 (20) 6.9 (20) 8.62 (25) 6.41 (25)
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
The passage to be summarized, adapted from Lester Brown’s The interdependence of nations, dealt with the 
unemployment crisis in Third World Countries. It appeared to be not only unfamiliar reading material for 
many candidates but also beyond their grasp. For example, many candidates seemed unable to fully 
understand the meaning of expressions such as to bring under the plough, unique situation in historical 
terms, profound implications, political and economic well-being of countries. 
The candidates who demonstrated competence or superiority were able to summarize the passage in 80 
words, as required, without losing either the focus or the content of the original passage. The weaker 
candidates simply lifted sections from the original passage to form a summary. As regards economy of 
expression, in several of the incompetent responses, the original passage was reproduced in a telegraphic 
style through omission of function words and transitional words and phrases, thus producing a string of 
disjointed sentences. Weaker responses also showed evidence of a lack of fundamental skills in summary 
writing. For instance, the listing of countries was quite notably preserved: “ … the densely populated 
countries of Asia, the Middle East, North Africa, Central America and the Andean Region.” 
Advice to teachers 
Students need to be exposed to a variety of reading material including basic magazines produced by 
international organisations on the health and economic conditions of people across the world. Students 
would thus expand and enrich their vocabulary by regular reading of relevant literature. This could be done 
within a classroom book club. 
In order to help students express themselves logically, precisely and concisely, teachers should provide 
students with ample exercises in making construction shifts and writing/recognizing equivalent sentences. 
Routine oral practice in the use of transitional words and phrases would also be useful. 
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
The general performance on this section was commendable to some extent. The fact that students could 
easily relate to the content of both passages resulted in a few of them integrating the content into their short 
stories. 
Question 2 sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage taken from Juliana Magloire’s The 
Sea Hawk. 
Overall, those questions which posed the greatest difficulty were 2 (c) and 2 (g), with 2 (e) proving to be the 
easiest. The stronger candidates had no problem with the questions and offered appropriate and correct 
responses to the majority of them. The weaker candidates had difficulty in interpreting the passage and the 
evidence of this was given in the nature of their responses. For example, in response to 2 (a) (What did Bo 
do for a living? ) candidates gave responses such ‘doctor’, ‘smuggler’, ‘engineer’, ‘lifeguard’ as well as 
other incorrect answers. 
- 13 -
Question 3 sought in part to test candidates’ understanding of a passage on beauty and the beauty industry 
taken from a newspaper magazine. 
The last three questions (e-g) were better handled than the first four. Weaker candidates were unable to 
interpret expressions such as going under the knife and beauty can no longer be considered skin deep in 3 (a) 
and 3 (b) respectively. Many of the weaker candidates quoted large portions of the passage with the hope 
that these would provide the correct answer. 
Advice to teachers 
Students need more practice in answering the kinds of questions set on the paper, questions requiring precise 
answers. In preparing for these questions teachers should make sure that students read the questions a 
number of times before they attempt to write their answers. After reading the whole passage, students should 
also re-read the section of the passage relevant to each specific question to make sure that what they are 
thinking of writing is what the passage says. Students should be advised to re-read what they have written to 
make sure that it makes sense to someone reading it. A specific area that needs greater focus is getting 
students to recognise inference. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture featuring an old man sitting playing a 
guitar. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which ended with the words I should have known better 
than to rely on someone like that. Question 6 required candidates to describe the experience of someone 
named Chris who was seeing the city for the first time at Christmas. 
The most popular of these questions was Question 4. The least popular was Question 5 and the weakest and 
most inappropriate responses came from those who attempted Question 6. 
 In relation to Question 4 and Question 5, the stronger candidates were able to use lively vocabulary and 
imaginative settings to give better than a pedestrian recounting of incidents. They were able to develop a plot 
adequately, set up interesting conflict situations and have a satisfactory resolution. They made use of well￾selected details, had good characterization and effective use of dialogue. Their stories were credible. 
The weaker candidates demonstrated various degrees of inability to use the elements of short story writing. 
They were unable to organize events and had great difficulty in using language effectively and managing the 
mechanics of grammar. There was usually a tenuous link between stimulus and story; the ending was most 
often forced, with the result that the whole strained one’s credibility. 
In relation to Question 6, most candidates wrote responses with long introductions and focussed very little 
on the description of Chris’ experience. 
Advice to teachers 
 
Some of the weaknesses in this section that need special attention are: 
 
• Grammatical problems (tense, use of pronouns, sentence structure) 
• Mere recounting of events with little or no attempt to make the story come alive through 
development of plot, characterization, appeal to the senses, effective selection of details. 
• Poor paragraphing and ineffective use of dialogue. 
It is recommended therefore that teachers employ all available resources to: 
• teach the elements of story writing systematically; 
• provide students with models of good short stories; 
• analyse good short stories as a classroom activity; 
• clarify for students on an ongoing basis the difference between report writing and story writing; 
- 14 - • provide students with copious practice in writing stories; 
• stimulate a desire among students to read; 
• not to give up on the teaching of the mechanics of writing; 
• monitor more carefully bad handwriting and careless errors such as the pervasive ‘the’ for ‘they’. 
 
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
This section tested the candidates’ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of 
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on the topic Too much feteing and partying in the 
Caribbean today is encouraging idleness and indiscipline . Question 8 required candidates to write an 
argument either supporting or opposing the statement As soon as children reach the age of 18, they should 
leave home, find a job and live independently. 
Question 8 was the preferred one of the two. Although most students who attempted the question clearly had 
views on it, some had difficulty in effectively developing points to support their arguments. There was, 
however, evidence of attempts to expand, show cause and effect and employ persuasive techniques in the 
presentation of the essay. 
The better candidates selected relevant information and developed points clearly in support of the position 
taken. There were instances of logical development and appropriate reinforcement of the argument. Some 
candidates were able to clinch their arguments with an effective conclusion. 
There was a general weakness in expression and mechanics of writing. In weaker scripts there was a mere 
listing of points, under-developed thoughts and limited views. There was also evidence of misuse of 
prepositions, awkward syntax, sentence fragments, run-on sentences and neglect of appropriate punctuation, 
especially question marks. 
Advice to teachers 
Classroom teachers need to emphasize language expression, especially sentence structure, appropriate 
vocabulary, mechanics and organisation of argument. There is also need for more concerted teaching of 
literary devices and techniques of persuasion. This will greatly assist in the coherence of responses, 
sequencing and logical development of argument. In addition, interpretative and organisational skills need to 
be mastered by students. For this to be possible, classroom teachers, especially those whose major was 
English literature rather than language, first need to be actively aware of these skills, master them and use 
effective strategies to get students to acquire the same. 
Teachers are encouraged to continue to provide classroom activities for students to practise persuasive skills 
orally. They should encourage students to ‘translate’ popular slang expressions and should use ‘teachable 
moments’ to underscore the concept of appropriate use of language. Interesting newspaper editorials could 
be used for class discussions. This would also help to develop students’ analytical thinking and ability to 
respond concisely to higher order questions posed in Section 2. Students need more practice in logical 
development of argument, use of rhetorical questions and appropriate use of figurative language. Students 
need to be given many opportunities to write. Students need more practice in the use of topic sentences and 
paragraphs. Students would benefit from timed practice exercises in preparation for the examination. 
Too few students are demonstrating competence in Profile 2 (Expression) simply because they are having 
problems with the mechanics of writing. Students seem oblivious of spelling rules and the need to spell 
correctly. For example, in Section 3 which provided a picture stimulus of an old man playing a guitar, there 
were at least a dozen different spellings of the word ‘guitar’. One noticeable element this year was that many 
students demonstrated competence in the use of quotation marks. Apart from this, punctuation was limited to 
full stops and commas. Paragraphing was ignored this year so often, as it has been in previous years, that one 
begins to wonder whether students ever get enough practice in this aspect of writing. There is therefore a 
constant need to monitor and address these elements of writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK I THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2008 
ENGLISH A
Copyright © 2008 Caribbean Examination Council ® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL AND BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2008 
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency 
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for 24 per cent of the Understanding component of the 
examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the Expression component as 
well as 16 per cent Understanding (all of Section 2 and part of Question 1). In Paper 02 candidates were 
allowed a choice in Section III between story writing and description. 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is a 
follows:- 
PAPER 01
Multiple 
Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression − 90* = 114+
 144+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+ 144+
 190+
 == 100% 
 *raw score +
computed score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above this year and previous years is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR*) 46.41 46.25 41.86
(T&T*) 55.81 52.54 49.56
The performance mean for the examination (out if a total of 190*) for 2006, 2007 and 2008 is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR) 77.87 77.31 74.74
(T&T) 83.44 80.12 78.58
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008
(ROR) 24.34 23.26 26.24
(T&T) 26.10 24.01 26.98
*ROR – Rest of the Region excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
 T&T – Trinidad and Tobago
-3- 
Average performance (for 2008) in the component section of Paper 02 is given below. 
2008 
Section 1 Summary skills 10.42 (30) (ROR)
8.78 (30) (T&T) 
Section 2 Comprehension 8.84 (30) (ROR) 
12.98 (30) (ROR)
Section 3 Story Writing 
 Description
13.29 (35) (ROR)
14.25 (35) (T&T)
11.23 (35) (ROR)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
Section 4 Argument 12.78 (35) (ROR)
13.13 (35) (T&T)
General advice 
Teachers need to emphasise that CXC English A (both Basic and General) is an English language 
examination and that candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and production (expression), in the English language. In the examination, 
these skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (not only full stops and 
commas, but also the not so frequently used ones such as colons and semi-colons), as well as other 
conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, abbreviations, the writing of 
numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence structure and paragraphing. 
Teachers should try to build on young people‟s love of text messaging and have them convert this kind of 
writing into kind that is acceptable in this examination. 
Students should come to the examination with a well rehearsed procedure for tackling each question. In 
accordance with the concept of writing as a process (abbreviated under examination conditions), candidates 
should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a 
rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, in doing a 
description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each individual 
student, based on the student‟s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair 
copy under CXC examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting and editing so that the appearance of their 
work is not off-putting to examiners. Even though examiners have to make a great effort to decipher every 
word that some candidates have written, candidates should never forget that it is their own responsibility to 
write legibly. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed that 
public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one‟s ability 
to perform in the world of work. Consequently, it is not advantageous to treat English language as merely 
an academic subject or as a subject for „dorks/nerds‟.
Specific advice on the section of Papers 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organized logically within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC markers 
are instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by candidates 
to use their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters and 
policemen) and should be treated as such by teachers and candidates. In the case of business students who 
-4- 
may be told that an executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case here –
candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original and words 
that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself and not like a 
chopped-up version of another one. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes changes meanings or 
insert extraneous material. This is penalized. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt 
to mislead or deceived or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. So, those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
In assessing Question 1, the examiners pay specific attention to the specified word limit, the candidates 
ability to use his/her own language, the accuracy and coverage of the major points and the ability to organize 
and connect the main points to make the answer read smoothly. There is evidence to suggest that some 
candidates form Belize did not have a clear idea of what was required to achieve a satisfactory mark in 
Section 1. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, 
one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates‟ responsibility to 
indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner‟s responsibility to select it out of a number of 
possibilities given by the candidates. 
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that students have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some 
questions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. So, students should know how to select word or 
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question asks:
if it requires „a word‟ or „a phrase‟, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an 
indication that the student does not know exactly what the answer is. 
In the preparation for Section 3 every candidates should have read the best story form preceding years in 
order to get a sense of what is required. (These „Best Stories‟ are available from CXC). These stories 
should not be memorized and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not 
memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better students tend to write stories that fall within or not to far outside the word limits. Stories that stretch 
into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to create 
atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly behaving 
like reports, with weak language. Students should try to improve their own techniques of story writing, 
including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good stories written 
by Caribbean authors. 
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes 
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with the 
simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral spontaneous story-telling 
based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate some interesting 
class productions – for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (for example, the different components must be 
linked appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets 
-5- 
must be linked appropriately (for example, background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). 
The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. 
Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (for 
example, visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of 
language to create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, 
atmosphere and setting. Although responses to this question have improved over the last three years, there 
are still too many candidates who are writing a story and not paying attention to the instruction given. 
In the case of section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Students should pay attention to „tone‟ and 
„audience‟ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Students 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspaper as well as 
short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For some 
unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that they must 
agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact is, however, 
that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiner‟s view.
DETAILED COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Rest of the Region excluding Trinidad and Tobago 
SECTION ONE (Profiles – Understanding and Expression) 
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from an article in a 
magazine dealing with the sea turtles, their habits, threats to them and attempts to conserve them. 
Candidates were expected to organize the information and present it in continuous prose in no more than 120 
words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
 Turtles have been around for a very long time 
 Turtles are capable of living very long lives 
 Their number has been drastically reduced recently 
 They are endangered now because of : 
- man-made treats 
- natural features - beach erosion causing loss of eggs
loss of eggs and hatchlings to predators 
their own low rate of reproduction 
 Conservation is difficult because of the turtles‟ migratory habits
 There is now a more hopeful future since conservation attempts are being made 
 Visiting sanctuaries to observe turtles can be a rich experience. 
Following are two excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
-6- 
(1) There are seven species of turtles, ancient creatures capable of living very long lives. Yet, these 
animals are now endangered. The threats to them are both man-made and natural. Man-made threats 
include pollution, bad fishing practices and coastal development. Natural threats include predators, 
the fact that the animal lays its eggs on beaches and therefore the eggs are vulnerable, beach erosion 
and the turtle‟s own low rate of reproduction. In addition, since the turtles migrate vast distances and 
spend most of their time at sea, conservationists have difficulty in helping with their situation. Some 
attempts are being made, however, including having sanctuaries here in the Caribbean. These 
regional organisation provide the additional service of educating and entertaining visitors. (118 
words) 
(2) Sea turtles, which have been around for a very long time, are now under threat of extinction. Their 
number has decreased drastically over the last ten years because of several threats, man-made and 
natural. Man-made threats include pollution, fishing and coastal development. Natural threats 
include predators and beach erosion. Not only do eggs take a long time to hatch, but they have only a 
slim chance of coming to maturity. There are current attempts being made to conserve turtles, but 
conservation is difficult because turtles migrate long distances, do not reproduce often and nest at 
night. Organisations in the Caribbean have been working in various ways towards increasing their 
survival. Their efforts provide visitors with enriching experiences. (117 words) 
Performance on Question 1 this year was about the same as last year, revealing the same strengths and 
weaknesses in candidates‟ answers. There were still too many candidates who did not observe the word 
limit given. Among these, some seemed to operate with the casual assumption that excess would be 
overlooked in all answers, while a few attempted to deceive the examiners by putting an incorrect number of 
words at the end of their answer. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim. Candidates who 
approached summary writing as a deletion exercise often ended up having sentences or pieces of sentences 
which were improperly connected to what preceded, were inaccurate or incoherent. In most cases, such 
candidates reached the word limit when they were about two thirds in the passage and then they added a 
sentence from the last paragraph or simply disregarded the rest. As in this passage, important points may 
occur at the end and if you do not recognise them, you will lose the writer‟s main intention.
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated satisfactory comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to cover all the main points, omitting unnecessary details and 
repetitions and using language which demonstrated appropriate word choice. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
i) remind students to observe the stated length.
ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done; insist that students 
read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing 
skills(comprehension and composition skills). 
iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using one‟s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
-7- 
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
e) observing correct mechanics of the language. 
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Performance in this section was significantly below last year‟s and this was principally because of 
candidates‟ response to the poem.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of part of the poem “The way we were” by 
Maureen Roberts. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set: 
(a) West Indians 
(b) dollars and cents 
(c) It is reaction of surprise/amusement/disbelief/ sarcasm 
(d) She is confident; she thinks highly of herself; she has a sense of humour 
(e) line 23 
(f) „fingers stiff with fear‟; „vocal cords contracted with the curse of shyness‟
(g) Her attitude is (positive) appreciative, thankful. 
In the case of (a), any reasonable and appropriate alternative was accepted. Most candidates answered (b) 
incorrectly, giving shillings and pence as the answer. Since 2(c) and (d) especially required candidates to go 
beyond quoting from the passage and to make an assessment of the narrator, this question was generally not 
well done. In the case of 2(e), candidates were expected to see the difference between the harsher first part 
of the poem and the more pleasant second part and to identify where the change occurred. Only a small 
number were able to identify the point of change accurately. On the whole, therefore, Question 2 was not 
well done. This may partly be attributable to the fact that the passage was in verse. 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a letter to the editor of The Saturday Voice
newspaper about Carnival. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions asked: 
(a) She does not like it.
(b) You/We cannot; none (because it is a rhetorical question).
(c) Move/barely/swaying to.
(d) To create the impression that beads are overused.
(e) Carnival/the participants in Carnival/the costumes of Carnival
(f) Sand/Sandy colour/ the desert
(g) She uses alliteration, that is , a number of words beginning with „s‟.
(h) July
-8- 
Performance on Question 3 was better than on Question 2. However, a significant percentage of candidates 
lost marks because their answers were not precise enough, as in the case of (g) which required „alliteration‟ 
or some accurate paraphrase. Even though most candidates answered 3(h) correctly, there were some who 
could not get beyond the time of Carnival in their own country. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to grasp implied meanings and not just obvious 
ones, to make summary assessments of characters and to express these accurately. 
Teachers should dissuade students from giving long-winded answers which really conceal ignorance − any 
answer which provides two or more alternatives in the hope that the examiner will select the correct one will 
automatically be awarded zero marks. 
The incidence of particular question types will vary according to the selections the examiners make to 
ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers should therefore familiarize themselves with all sections of 
the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to make sure that they provide practice for students in all the 
question types specified in the syllabus, including prose and verse. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a woman appeared to be 
screaming. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the sentences The amusing thing is 
that I didn‟t plan it this way. It was just a series of unexpected turns. Question 6 (the descriptive easy) 
required candidates to describe the scene before a match between two high school teams. 
Question 6 was the least popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 26% of the candidates) and 
also the one least well done on average. Question 4 was the most popular (attempted by 39% with Question 
5 in between in terms of the number of candidates who attempted it (35%), but the best done on average. 
Question 4 produced the best story for 2008. The overall performance on this section was about the same as 
last year. 
Question 4 produced a variety of responses. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture quite well 
into the story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 proved to be challenging for many candidates who seemed unable to illustrate a series of 
unexpected turns in their story. As usual, many responses to this question had the stimulus quotation 
inserted without satisfactory integration into the plot. 
In the cases of Question 6, there was marked improvement over last year, indicating that candidates were 
better prepared to write a descriptive essay. However, too many candidates seemed unable to resist the 
temptation to write about the match itself instead of limiting themselves to the scene just before the match. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
Teachers should treat Section Three as having two sections – two question requiring short stories and 
one question requiring a descriptive essay.
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their writing 
classes – how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of the story-writing 
that might interest even reluctant writers. 
-9- 
Over the years, candidates have used the story lines in films they have seen as the basis for their short 
stories. However, even though originality in story line is not an absolute requirement, candidates should not 
get into the habit of slavishly copying other people‟s material. It is not only illegal but it will also result in 
the copied parts of stories being discredited. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. Candidates 
whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood and feelings. 
Training in short writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing and proof reading. 
Students should be explicitly made familiar with the difference between narrative and descriptive. Students 
should imagine themselves using a camera and describing what they see through the lens as they move the 
camera gradually form left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary for teachers to get 
students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking adjectives 
and adverbs, students should be wary about memorizing flowery phrases and sticking them willy-nilly into 
descriptive essays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus specifically on 
vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and another of adverbs 
and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. Teachers need to make 
these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
Question 7 and 8
Question 7 asked candidates to present an argument for or against the idea that Caribbean countries would 
be better served if they had women as prime ministers. Question 8 asked candidates to express their views 
on the topic Planning for the future is a waste of time. Too much of our future is beyond our control. 
Candidates did not demonstrate any significant difference in performance for the one or the other question. 
Performance in this section this year was slightly lower than last year. On average, Question 8 produced 
better answers than Question 7. Most of the good responses to Question 8 outlined the benefits to be derived 
from planning and give illustrative examples. Responses to Question 7 overwhelmingly concentrated on 
traditional concepts of women arguing that such characteristics would make them either good or bad prime 
ministers respectively. Added to this, there was a fairly general assumption (except in the case of Guyanese 
candidates) that prime ministers were all-powerful. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
While this section of the paper often gives topics which are immediate to teenagers, students also need to 
keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interest. It is not always that topics close 
to the immediate and current experience of teenagers will be given in this section. 
Students need constant practise in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, „accordingly‟ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
-10- 
DETAILED COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Trinidad and Tobago
SECTION ONE (Profile – Understanding and Expression) 
Question 1
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from an article in a 
magazine dealing with ethanol production in America. The topic was chosen because it was seen to be 
topical, even if not local. Candidates were expected to organize the information and present it in continuous 
prose in no more than 120 words. 
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:- 
 Ethanol production has increased tremendously and is still increasing 
 Ethanol seems to offer the USA a chance to become less dependent on imported oil 
 That would free the USA from concerns about oil prices and uncertainty of supply 
 However, a sufficient increase in ethanol production is unlikely because: 
- the land space to produce the corn is unavailable 
- Americans are addicted to cheaper oil 
- ethanol is less cost effective 
- ethanol production and distribution depend on oil 
- expensive basic elements need to be put in place to facilitate ethanol distribution 
Following are two excellent summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ 
but still give the critical information needed: 
(1) Ethanol production in the USA has increased tremendously and is still increasing. There are 
significant benefits should the USA manage to reduce dependence on foreign oil through the 
production of ethanol. The price of oil would fall significantly; oil producing countries would have less 
power; and the USA would be less worried about fluctuating oil prices and supply. However, 
reduction of dependence on oil is unlikely. One reason is that there is insufficient land to grow the 
volume of corn needed. In addition, America has become addicted to oil which is more cost effective 
than ethanol. Also, ethanol brings problems as its production and distribution depend on the use of oil 
and require infrastructural change. (115 words) 
(2) Ethanol production in the USA has increased dramatically to the point where it exceeds the farmers‟ 
ability to produce the necessary amount of corn. Ethanol could reduce the dependence on foreign oil 
so that the USA would not be subject to fluctuating prices or the threat of interrupted oil supply. The 
price of oil would fall and the power of OPEC reduced. The biggest hindrance is that the USA does not 
have enough land to produce the required amount of corn. Furthermore, production costs are high 
and ethanol itself requires the use of oil in all stages of its production and distribution. In addition, 
since the traditional forms of distribution are unsuitable for ethanol, costly modifications need to be 
made. (120 words)
Performance on Question 1 was below standard, probably because the subject matter was not within the 
immediate interest of many candidates. Since candidates had to read the passage carefully instead of 
depending on their general knowledge of the subject, the exercise proved difficult for many of them. Many 
candidates, probably more so than usual, lifted portions of the passage, of varying lengths, verbatim, without 
understanding them and without properly connecting them. There were still too many candidates who did 
not observe the word limit given. 
-11- 
Suggestion for teachers and students 
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
i) remind students to observe the stated length
ii) drill students in the skill of reading paragraphs and identifying the topic 
iii) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises both comprehension and 
composition skills 
iv) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using their own words as far as possible 
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) using connectives to achieve fluency 
d) observing correct mechanics of the language.
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Performance in this section was below last year‟s but about the same as that of 2006. On average Question 3 
was done better than Question 2. 
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage taken from Mark McWatt‟s 
Suspended Sentences: Fictions of Atonement. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the 
questions set: 
(a) rain/mud 
(b) He laughed because the idea of reaching Annandale was ridiculous/He laughed because the writer did 
not realize that it was impossible to get to Annandale in the rainy season 
(c) unpleasant/dreary/gloomy 
(d) because he could not get down the river/because he could not get to where he wanted to go 
(e) because it was isolated/because it „seemed to lie … between reality and dream‟
(f) meandered 
(g) the almost opaque curtain of rain 
(h) disgust/frustration 
Since 2(c) and (d) especially required candidates to go beyond quoting from the passage and to make an 
assessment of the narrator, this question was generally not well done. In the case of 2(e), candidates were 
expected to see the difference between the negative first part of the poem and the more pleasant second part 
and to identify where the change occurred. Only a small number were able to identify the point of change. 
-12- 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of an article in the Sunday Sun newspaper 
about „boys on the block‟. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the question asked:
(a) It gives you the topic of the passage/It tells you what the passage is about 
 
(b) Intelligent 
(c) by using a quotation from a magazine/by citing an authority/by giving evidence that it is widespread 
throughout the Caribbean 
(d) underachievers/ the unqualified/slower children 
(e) the failure of education to provide adequate, serious compensatory schooling 
(f) It will become a social cost to all of us/There boys will become liabilities 
(g) The problems must be tackled root and branch systematically and in a sustained manner 
(h) education 
As is usually the case, candidates found those questions which required identification of words from the 
passage easier than those which required a judgement or assessment. In the case of 3(a), instead of stating 
the relevance of the quotation, many candidates simply explained what it meant. A significant number of 
candidates gave the answer „Yes‟ to 3(h) and/or repeated the three alternatives in the question, showing 
clearly that they did not understand a straightforward question structure. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to move beyond the literal, to make logical 
judgements and to express these accurately. Teachers should ensure that students understand the structure 
and wording of questions and not assume that they do. Teachers should dissuade students from giving 
answers with several alternatives. Such answers are generally awarded zero marks. 
Teachers should bear in mind that questions which require judgements and assessments will always occur on 
the examination paper, in Question 2 and Question 3, the balance across the two questions differing from 
year to year. The incidence of particular question types varies to make sure that the full syllabus is covered. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a woman appeared to be 
dancing or performing a ritual or reaching for something. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story 
which included the words As my parents sat there discussing me, I could not believe what they were saying. 
This was my life, not theirs. Question 6 (the descriptive essay) required candidates to describe the scene 
from a building as people stared out at the city. Performance on this section was generally better than last 
year and candidates are coming to terms with the requirements of Question 6. 
Question 5 was by far the most popular of the questions in this section (attempted by 75%) and the best done 
on average. Question 6 was the least popular (attempted by 6% of the candidates) and Question 4 did not 
fare much better in terms of the number of candidates who attempted it (14%). The performance on 
Question 4 and 6 was about the same and it was not significantly lower than that on Question 5. 
Question 4 produced a variety of interpretations. Most candidates were able to integrate the picture into the 
story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
-13- 
Question 5 proved to be attractive to many candidates who seemed to be familiar with the situation. As a 
results, the stories were generally interesting and satisfactorily written. 
In the case of Question 6, there was variety in the responses with many candidates choosing a science-fiction 
type of story. 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create 
atmosphere, mood and feelings. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, 
drafting, editing and proof reading. 
Students should continue to stress the difference between narrative and descriptive. In the case of the 
descriptive, a good approach is to imagine oneself using a camera and describing what one sees through the 
lens as one moves the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole scene. While it is necessary 
for teachers to get students accustomed to description by practising descriptive phrase and sentences with 
striking adjectives and adverbs, students should be wary about memorizing flowery phrases and sticking 
them willy-nilly into descriptive assays. In order to prepare students for this question, teachers have to focus 
specifically on vocabulary enrichment by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and 
another of adverbs and get students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific scenes. 
Teachers need to make these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
Question 7 and 8
Question 7 asked candidates to support one of two opinions given about who should determine employees‟ 
dress at work. Question 8 asked candidates to express their views on the topic Governments should make it 
compulsory for all householders to take precautions against natural disasters. Candidates demonstrated a 
decided preference for Question 7 over Question 8 but, on average, performance on Question 8 was 
marginally better than Question 7.
Suggestion for teachers and students 
While it is necessary to keep abreast of topics of local interest, students also need to read and discuss in class 
wider or international topics because it is not always that topic close to their immediate and current 
experience will be given in this section. 
Students need constant practice in logical development of argument, especially in the proper use of 
conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast and concession. 
Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, „accordingly‟ should be 
mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as they often are. 
-14- 
BASIC PROFICIENCY EXAMINATIONS
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency 
The examination in 2008 was the last year for this examination. Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, 
accounted for most of the Understanding component of the examination overall and Paper 02, the free 
response paper, accounted for all of the Expression component as well as part of the Understanding (all of 
section 2 and part of Question 1). In Paper 02 candidates were allowed a choice in Section 3 between story 
writing and description. 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is a 
follows:- 
PAPER 01
Multiple 
Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60 37 97 = 60%
Expression − 65 65 = 40% 
TOTAL 60 102 165 == 100% 
 *raw score +
computed score
The number of candidates taking the examination in 2008 declined significantly when compared with 
previous years: 
Year Candidate entry 
2006 3 089
2007 2 147
2008 1 597
There was a decrease in the percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in 2008: 
Year % candidates acquiring 
Grade III and above
2006 26.51
2007 25.01
2008 17.62
Detailed Comments 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Candidates‟ performance in Paper 01 in 2008 was slightly better than in 2007. The mean score in 2006 was 
49 per cent, this moved to 46 per cent in 2007 and 48.35 per cent in 2008. 
-15- 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Candidates‟ performance in Paper 02 in 2008 was lower than in the preceding years. The mean score in 
2006 was 31 per cent; this declined to 29 per cent in 2007 and further declined to 26.07 per cent in 2008. 
Average performance in the component sections of Paper 02 was as follows (The numbers in brackets are 
the maximum totals for the respective questions): 
2006 2007 2008
Section 1 Summary skills 7.17 (30) 7.35 (30) 7.23 (30)
Section 2 Comprehension 12.36 (27) 12.93 (27) 11.27 (27)
Section 3 Story Writing/Description 6.65 (20) 6.29 (20) 
5.20 ( 20)
6.76 (20) 
7.14 (20)
Section 4 Argument 8.62 (25) 6.41 (25) 5.56 (25)
SECTION ONE (Profiles – Understanding and Expression) 
The passage to be summarized was adapted from an advertisement in a newspaper for „The Caribbean 
Awards for Excellence‟. It was organized in three sub-sections under the following headings: „Mission‟, 
„the Magnitude of our appreciation‟, „Award categories‟. The layout presented a stout challenge to some 
candidates, many of whom began their summaries with a sentence fragment that was simply a re-statement 
of the Mission Statement, but with no clear linkages. The few candidates who demonstrated competence 
were able to identify the main ideas and write the summary comprehensively. They were able to use 
standard English, organize their ideas sequentially and summarise the passage in 80 words, as required, 
without losing either the focus or the content of the original passage. 
The weaker candidates presented summaries that retained the organization and language of the original 
passage. In such cases it was difficult to assess whether the candidate had meaningfully selected relevant 
details or whether these were stumbled upon by chance. As regards economy of expression, in several of the 
incompetent responses, the original passage was reproduced in a telegraphic style, omitting function words 
and transitional words and phrases and thus producing a string of disjointed sentences. Weaker responses 
also showed evidence of a lack of fundamental skills in summary writing. For example, the three award 
categories were mentioned and subsequently elaborated: “…This includes those who…”
Apart from its layout, the language of the passage also presented difficulties to candidates, who seemed 
unfamiliar with such phrases as „increased visibility‟, „financial component‟, „scale and scope‟, „give 
impetus to‟. Some candidates interpreted the word „candidates‟ as synonymous with „students‟ and 
therefore wrote summaries not about citizens being rewarded for community work, but about students being
rewarded for excellent performance on exams. A number of students also exceeded the word limit by 
rewriting the passage, while others took ideas from different sections and mixed them to form a summary. 
Students‟ responses suggested that they needed more practice in summary writing: it is quite evident that 
they were unable to identify main ideas and paraphrase these ideas. 
SECTION TWO (Profile – Understanding) 
Question 2 and 3
The general performance on this section was below that of previous years. 
Question 2 tested the candidates‟ ability to respond to a passage taken from Earl Lovelace‟s Salt, featuring 
the experiences of a boy. Most students performed well in contextual questions, but produced weaker 
responses in questions which required synthesis and evaluation. For example, in 2(d) “To what does „it‟ 
refer in line 9 of paragraph 1?” Students gave erroneous responses (the sun; the cemetery) and were unable 
-16- 
to correctly identify „the town‟. Question 2(f) and 2(g), particularly the former “(What does the father think 
of the son in paragraph 3?”) also presented difficulties to students.
Question 3 tested the candidates‟ ability to respond to an argumentative passage from a newspaper article 
(„Carnival Survives‟) written by Caspar London. Again, questions which required assessments proved 
difficult. For instance, in 3(e) “What does the author imply by the words „whatever than means‟ in lines 14 
and 15?”, many students missed the sarcasm and responses quite literally that the author did not understand 
the expression. In this question, as in Question 2, many of the weaker candidates quoted large portions of 
the passage with the hope that these would provide the examiners with the correct answer. However, this 
strategy does not work. 
SECTION THREE (Profile – Expression) 
Question 4, 5 and 6
As usual, this section posed a major challenge to the majority of candidates. 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture featuring a man apparently jumping 
through the air or running. Question 5 asked candidate to write a story based on the sentence It was then 
that I remembered my mother‟s words “What you sow is what you reap”. Question 6 provided the words 
The spacecraft blasted off. Mars here we come! and asked candidates to describe the astronaut‟s journey 
and their landing on Mars. The most popular of these questions was Question 5 and the least popular was 
Question 6. Question 5 was satisfactorily interpreted, as was Question 4. In Question 6, students generally 
did not pay attention to key words: describe; journey; landing. 
Some of the weaknesses in this section that need special attention are: 
Grammatical problems (tense, use of pronouns, sentence structure)
Mere recounting of events with little or no attempt to make the story come alive through 
development of plot, characterization, appeal to the senses, effective selection of details. Poor 
paragraphing and ineffective use of dialogue. 
SECTION FOUR (Profile – Expression) 
This section tested the candidates‟ ability to express their views persuasively using various techniques of 
argument. Question 7 required students to state their views on the topic There is nothing wrong with 
children being subjected to hardships and being denied privileges in life; it will build character. Question 8 
required candidates to write an argument either supporting or opposing the statement Victims of violent 
crimes should be compensated by the relatives of the criminals. 
A significant percentage of the candidates did not attempt this section. Among those who did, virtually the 
same number did each of the questions, but Question 7 was not as poorly done as Question 8. Candidates 
had problems interpreting some important words and expressions in the topics for example, „privilege‟ and 
„hardship‟ (Q7); „compensate‟ and „victims‟ (Q8). These misinterpretations sometimes rendered their 
arguments invalid. Although most students who attempted the questions clearly had views on the topics, 
some had difficulty in effectively developing points to support their arguments. There was, however, 
evidence of attempts to expand, show cause and effect and employ persuasive techniques in the presentation 
of the essay. 
The better candidates selected relevant information and developed points clearly in support of the position 
taken. There were instances of logical development and appropriate reinforcement of the argument. Some 
candidates were able to clinch their arguments with an effective conclusion. 
There was a general weakness in expression and mechanics of writing. In weaker scripts there was a mere 
listing of points, under-developed thoughts and limited views. There was also evidence of misuse of 
prepositions, awkward syntax, sentence fragment, run-on sentences and neglect of appropriate punctuation, 
especially question marks. 
-17- 
General comments
Not enough students demonstrated competence in Area II (Expression). Poor expression was most obvious 
in Section 3 where students wrote phrases such as: 
It was graduation day and we receive medels for our achievements; 
The senter of my hair was balled 
They need freedom to associate with people to know their upstands and their downfalls 
When you are in your cells you are very board 
I laided on my bed and I decided to fall asleep 
One encouraging fact is that many students demonstrated competence in the use of quotation marks. Apart 
from this, punctuation was limited to full stops and commas. The concepts of paragraphing is ignored so 
often that it prompts the question as to whether this aspect of writing is overlooked by teachers. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATIONS
MAY/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH A
Copyright 2008 Caribbean Examinations Council® 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2009 
GENERAL COMMENTS
General Proficiency
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for most of the UNDERSTANDING COMPONENT of 
the examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the EXPRESSION 
COMPONENT as well as part of the Understanding (all of Section 2 and part of Question 1). 
 The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers is as 
follows:- 
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in the two papers this year, and the three 
previous years is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
48.54 49.01 (RoR*) 41.86 56.44 
 (T&T*) 49.56 
 *Rest of Region 
 *Trinidad and Tobago
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 190*) for 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009 is as 
follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
79.14 77.94 (RoR*) 74.74 81.82 
 (T&T*) 78.58 
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 
marks is as follows: 
2006 2007 2008 2009
32.36 23.44 (RoR*) 26.24 27.92 
 (T&T*) 26.98 
PAPER 01
Multiple Choice
PAPER 02
Essay
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+ 40* = 30+ 76+ = 40%
Expression – 90* = 114+ 114+ = 60%
TOTAL 
*raw score
 46+
+ weighted score
144+ 190+ = 100%
* raw score+ computed score
- 3 -
Average performance (2007-2009) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below. 
2007 2008 2009
Section 1 
Summary skills
10.04 (30) 10.42 (30) (RoR)
8.78 (30) (T&T) 
10.69 (30)
Section 2 
Comprehension
15.45 (29) 8.84 (30) (RoR)
12.98 (30) (T&T)
11.13 (30)
Section 3 
Story Writing 
Description
13.62 (35) 
10.63 (35) 
13.29 (35) (RoR)
14.25 (35) (T&T)
11.23 (35) (RoR)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
13.27 (35)
13.30 (35) 
Section 4 
Argument
13.74 (35) 12.78 (35) (RoR)
13.13 (35) (T&T)
14.44 (35)
General advice
Teachers need to emphasise that candidates are required to demonstrate competence in and control of the 
English language. Preparation for the examination is a gradual process of acquiring and developing skills, 
both passive (comprehension) and productive (expression). In the examination, these skills must be 
demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks (full stops, commas, colons and semi￾colons), as well as other conventions in writing, such as inverted commas, upper case/lower case, 
abbreviations, the writing of numbers whether in figures or in words, correct spelling, proper sentence 
structure and paragraphing.
Teachers should try to build on young people‟s love of text messaging and other interactive types of 
communication on the computer (e.g. e-mail, Facebook) to enhance their understanding of skills that are 
required in non-face-to-face communication, and have them adapt these skills to fit the kind of writing 
that is acceptable in this examination. 
No matter how frustrating it may be, teachers must continue to use all their resources to encourage 
students to read because it is only by reading consistently that students will become comfortable with the 
written word. Furthermore, it is only by writing consistently that students will learn to write well. Reading 
(on its own) will not make a child acquire the skills of writing – passive skills (e.g. reading) cannot 
automatically transform themselves into active skills (e.g. writing). 
- 4 -
Candidates should come to the examination with a well practised procedure for tackling each question. 
Candidates should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure of identifying the topic, jotting down 
points, doing a rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is especially important in writing a summary, 
in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing a cogent argument. It is only through repeated 
practice beforehand that each student will come to some understanding of the best way to process a rough 
copy into a fair copy under examination conditions. 
Teachers should give students specific instructions about deleting, making insertions and making 
additions to their work so that what they write is intelligible to the examiners. Candidates must also 
acquire the habit of numbering answers correctly and setting out their answers on the page in a way that 
the examiners can recognise them. Even though examiners are required to make a great effort to decipher 
every word that some candidates have written and to find all the pieces of an answer, candidates should 
never forget that it is their own responsibility to write their answers legibly and clearly. Unlike the 
situation in school where in most cases one teacher corrects a whole test paper, in the CXC examination 
each answer is corrected by a different examiner. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and indeed 
the public at large generally regard performance in English language examinations as a measure of one‟s 
ability to perform in the world of work. It is almost a sure way to fail the English „A‟ examination by 
starting off believing that you already know English and all that you need is a little practice on one or two 
questions. This becomes even more critical for those who have to repeat the examination after failing to 
perform satisfactorily in it. 
Specific advice on the sections of Paper 02 
In Section 1, when a summary is required, main points must be identified and organised logically within 
the word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, CXC 
examiners are instructed to interpret this as incompetence. In other words, some attempt must be made by 
candidates to use their own words. Summarising is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters 
and policemen) and should be treated as such by teachers and students. In the case of business students 
who may be told that an executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case 
here – candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original and 
words that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself and 
not like a chopped-up version of another one. 
The passage to be summarised is usually taken from a newspaper or magazine which caters to the general 
public. In order to understand the passage, candidates must be familiar with English words and structures 
that educated people use in their general writing. In some cases a few words may not be familiar to a 
reader, but in those cases the reader will very likely be able to work out the meaning from the context. 
Candidates should therefore get into the habit of reading at least the editorial page in their local 
newspaper as well as letters to the editor. In addition, candidates should read one or two articles from 
magazines that cater to their age group: Caribbean magazines and even international magazines for the 
general public. In this way they will become better able to work out, among other things, unfamiliar 
words in context.
- 5 -
The examiners look first of all to see whether the word limit has been exceeded. They stop their reading 
at that point, disregarding all else. The examiners then look to see whether the candidate has understood 
and can clearly identify the main points in the passage and award marks accordingly. The examiners then 
assess whether the candidate has put those points together in an intelligible and logical manner using 
his/her own words and award marks accordingly. 
When candidates exceed the word limit, the marks may be reduced by as much as 20%. 
When candidates use only the words in the original passage, the marks are automatically reduced 
by 33%. 
Some candidates, in attempting to put the summary in their own words, sometimes change meanings or 
insert extraneous material. This is penalised. In real life such distortion would be seen either as an attempt 
to mislead or deceive or, in the case of a policeman presenting evidence to a court, it could lead to wrong, 
unfair and disastrous decisions. Those candidates seeking to achieve full marks or high marks should 
make sure that they preserve the meaning of the original. 
The questions in Section 2 are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates should be 
trained to pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. In response to each question, candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. 
Answers should be to the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a 
question which requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad 
strategy, one which usually results in zero being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates‟ 
responsibility to indicate clearly what the answer is; it is not the examiner‟s responsibility to select it out 
of a number of possibilities given by the candidate. 
This section requires students to respond to levels of meaning and to express their answers clearly. It is 
expected that candidates have learnt to use their judgment in answering questions. For example, some 
questions require paraphrases and some ask for evidence. Students should know how to select words or 
phrases (as required) and use quotation marks to so indicate. Also students need to do as the question 
asks: if it requires „a word‟ or „a phrase‟, then providing a sentence, for example, is often wrong – it is an 
indication that the candidate does not know exactly what the answer is. 
In the preparation for Section 3, every candidate should have read the best story from preceding years in 
order to get a sense of what is required. (These „Best Stories‟ are available from CXC). These stories 
should not be memorised and reproduced with slight alterations. More generally, candidates should not 
memorise published stories and hope that this kind of cheating escapes the attention of the examiners. 
Cheating is punished severely and can have serious consequences. 
Although the question paper states word limits as mainly approximations, the experience has been that the 
better students tend to write stories that fall within or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that 
stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to 
create atmosphere and mood, good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, mostly 
behaving like reports, with weak language. Students should try to improve their own techniques of story 
writing, including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between characters, by studying good 
stories written by Caribbean and other authors. 
- 6 -
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times candidates use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, sometimes
unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help students feel comfortable with 
the simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. Oral, spontaneous story￾telling based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial statements could stimulate interesting 
class productions – for listening, writing and peer interaction. 
Description must be clearly constructed and developed (e.g. the different components must be linked 
appropriately). Details must be logically and effectively sequenced. The different focuses and facets must 
be linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The 
interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the purely descriptive elements. 
Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole 
picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. Any change in perspective (e.g. 
visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There should be varied and lively use of language to 
create picture elements as well as appropriate choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and 
setting. Although responses to this question have improved over the last three years, there are still too 
many candidates who are writing a story and not paying attention to the instructions given. 
In the case of Section 4, note that argument skills require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using good 
argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Students should pay attention to „tone‟ and 
„audience‟ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they present. Students 
can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and editorials in newspapers as well 
as short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine section of newspapers. 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully, make sure they understand key words, then select their 
points, choose examples that support their points and be consistent and clear in their presentation. For 
some unfounded reason, some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that 
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The fact 
is, however, that the questions are deliberately set to allow for differences of opinion and most likely if 
candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely agree with what they think is the 
examiners‟ view or what they ought to say.
General Proficiency
SECTION ONE (Understanding & Expression) 
Question 1 
In this question candidates were asked to read and then summarise a passage taken from a magazine 
article dealing with difficulties faced by the sugar industry in the English-speaking Caribbean and 
solutions proposed. Candidates were expected to organise the information and present it in continuous 
prose in no more than 120 words. 
- 7 -
The examiners identified the major points in the passage to be the following:– 
Sugar remained the English-speaking Caribbean‟s premier export crop because of high prices and 
preferential treatment. 
Sugar has now become unviable since prices have declined because large global producers have 
entered the market. 
Sugar is important, however, because of its ecological impact and because it is a part of the life of 
a significant part of the population. 
 Caribbean economies have to change because of the WTO ruling. 
 Change will not be easy because it requires money, modernization and retraining. 
Following are three summaries of the passage which give some idea of how candidates may differ but still 
give the critical information needed: 
(1) Although many Caribbean states have abandoned sugar, chiefly because of competition from 
bigger producers, it remains the most important export crop in the English-speaking countries 
supported as it is by high prices and preferential trading agreements with the UK and the EC. 
In Jamaica, sugar still provides the livelihood for many in almost every parish and is a major 
foreign exchange earner. It is also environmentally friendly. However, elsewhere price cuts ruled 
by the WTO have led to changes in the importance and nature of the sugar industry, including the 
end of production in some cases. The success of this transition will depend on several factors, 
including European support, investments for modernization and retraining some workers. (116 
words) 
(2) Although cane production was abandoned in some Caribbean countries, the industry has 
flourished in others because of high prices and preferential trading arrangements with Europe. 
In Jamaica, sugar plays a vital part in contributing foreign exchange, in preserving the natural 
environment by preventing soil erosion and in providing a haven for animals. Recently, however, 
some Caribbean sugar industries became less profitable as larger countries started to export 
sugar. In response to this, some Caribbean countries have diversified. Europe’s decision to cut its 
preferred price, as directed by the WTO, has led to new industries being established, but this kind 
of change is difficult since European support is required as well as re-training of personnel to do 
other jobs. (117 words) 
(3) Caribbean economies have to reorganize in response to changes in the market economy for 
sugar. This means modernizing the industry as well as re-training and re-deploying human 
resources into other areas. The situation is partly a result of a WTO ruling against preferential 
conditions offered to the Caribbean by Europe, and partly because of the advent to the market of 
large producers like Brazil and Australia. These factors have made sugar production in the 
region less viable.
Though some countries chose to stop producing sugar, the Caribbean cannot afford to abandon 
the industry entirely not only because significant parts of the population rely on it for a 
livelihood, but also because it is an essential part of the ecological landscape. (120 words) 
- 8 -
Performance on Question 1 this year was marginally better than last year‟s, though revealing the same 
strengths and weaknesses in candidates‟ answers. However, there were still too many candidates who did 
not understand what is required in a summary. 
As usual, many candidates lifted portions of the passage verbatim, often because they were not quite sure 
of the meaning of a key word. Because the passage used Jamaica to show the continuing importance of 
the sugar industry in some places, some candidates concentrated almost their entire summary on Jamaica. 
Those candidates who tried to summarise by simply following the sequence of the passage (without 
reading the whole passage first and identifying the main points) reached the word limit when they were 
about two thirds in the passage and then simply disregarded the rest. This meant that they automatically 
lost marks for not identifying some of the main points and they lost marks for poor organisation of their 
summary. 
Superior scripts clearly demonstrated excellent comprehension and writing skills, without any injection of 
extraneous material. They were able to identify all the main points, omitting unnecessary details and 
repetitions, and they were able to put together the points in a coherent way, using their own language as 
far as possible . 
Suggestions for teachers and students
In preparing students for this section of the paper, teachers should: 
 (i) remind students to observe the stated length
 (ii) drill students in the skill of reading questions for theme and specific tasks to be done 
(iii) insist that students read the instruction given and not assume that every year it is identical. 
(iv) help students to recognize the fact that summary writing comprises reading and writing skills 
(comprehension and composition skills)
 (v) help students to appreciate some of the basic features of summary writing:- 
a) using one‟s own words as far as possible
b) using straightforward English with clarity and conciseness 
c) responding to the rubric of the question with its implications for audience, purpose and 
situation/context 
d) using connectives to achieve fluency of writing/reading 
e) observing correct mechanics of the language 
- 9 -
SECTION TWO (Understanding) 
Performance in this section was similar to last year‟s overall performance.
Question 2
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage from George Lamming‟s “Of 
thorns and thistles”. The following were deemed to be the correct answers to the questions set:
(a) She entered on tiptoe; she whispered 
(b) that there is tension; that there is conflict; a dramatic effect; an effect of give and take
(c) Her normal attitude was pleasant and agreeable.
(d) A tense or unpleasant atmosphere existed.
(e) She disapproved of it; she disliked it; it was outrageous and offensive
(f) She prepared herself to receive Rose; she was trying to calm herself; she shut herself off 
determined to ignore Rose; she wanted to appear to be asleep; she assumed a position of protest
(g) She was old and weak
(h) She had difficulty seeing. 
Most candidates found no difficulty answering (a), (e) and (g). In the case of (b), as is usually the case, 
whenever a question asks What effect does ..., there is a sharp separation of weaker students from stronger 
students. In the case of (c), a high percentage of candidates seemed not to be able to contrast the incident 
in the passage from what was „normal‟. It is clear that they expected a clue or the answer to be near the 
beginning of the passage and paid little attention to It was seldom that Angela displeased her, which 
occurred in the last paragraph. In the case of (d), it seemed as if the word atmosphere in this context 
posed a problem for many candidates or that they found difficulty finding an appropriate word to identify 
an atmosphere. (f) was probably the most testing of the questions in that it required candidates to 
formulate a conclusion about Mother Barton‟s posture based on what had happened before. This kind of 
task seemed to be beyond the reach of the majority of the candidates. In the case of (h), too many 
candidates found it difficult to understand that a summary answer was required rather than individual 
answers to each phrase given. 
Question 3
This question sought in part to test candidates‟ understanding of a passage taken from a newspaper article 
“Impact of Criminal Aliens” written by Tony Best. The following were deemed to be the correct answers 
to the questions asked: 
(a) Undocumented immigrants and immigrants who commit crimes
(b) It gives the idea of something happening unexpectedly or without ceremony or that it comes as a 
shock. 
(c) It means one is refusing to deal with the problem of the effects on the Caribbean of the 
deportation of immigrants who commit crimes.
- 10 -
(d) It evokes or encourages one to have sympathy or empathy for the position of the United States. 
(e) It suggests that “friends” is not to be taken at face value, that it has another meaning; it is an 
example of sarcasm or irony.
(f) An example is “choirboys are not being shipped to the region”.
(g) Many of the deportees left the region as underage children and were sent back to the Caribbean 
as hardened adult criminals.
(h) He is suggesting that all parties concerned should sit down and work out a reasonable policy.
Performance on Question 3 was below that on Question 2. As is usually the case, answers, such as (a), (g) 
and (h), which are explicitly stated in the passage were answered satisfactorily by most candidates. As 
was the case in Question 2, the phrase What is the effect of ... in (b) posed a great problem for the vast 
majority of the candidates, added to the fact that the word jolted seemed to be unfamiliar to many of 
them. The same was the case in (d) where, in addition to the word effect, many candidates could not get 
beyond using the word understand to explain understandably. In the case of (c), candidates had to know 
the meaning of the saying and then apply it to the passage. This double task was beyond most of the 
weaker candidates. It was mostly the weaker candidates who had problems with (e) and ((f). 
Suggestions for teachers and students 
Teachers still have to do more work in order to get students to grasp implied meanings and not just 
explicit meaning, to make summary assessments and to express these accurately. Teachers should bear in 
mind that questions which require judgements and assessments will always occur on the examination 
paper, in Question 2 and Question 3, with the balance across the two questions differing from year to 
year.
The incidence of particular question types and ways of phrasing questions (e.g. What effect does ...) will 
vary according to the selections the examiners make to ensure that the full syllabus is covered. Teachers 
should therefore familiarise themselves with all sections of the syllabus or peruse papers over the years to 
make sure that they provide practice for students in all the question types specified in the syllabus as well 
as the various ways of phrasing questions. 
Teachers should dissuade students from quoting whole sentences and even paragraphs in answer to a 
simple question. Unusually long answers immediately cause the examiners to think that the candidate 
does not really know the answer. In any case, any answer which provides two or more alternatives in the 
hope that the examiner will select the correct one will automatically be awarded zero marks. 
SECTION THREE (Expression) 
Questions 4, 5 & 6
Question 4 required that candidates write a story based on a picture in which a girl appeared to be reading 
a book to a boy. Question 5 asked candidates to write a story which included the sentences The door was 
closed and the cobwebs in front of it suggested it had not been opened for a long time. Moor turned the 
key and pushed open the door. Question 6 (the descriptive essay) required candidates to describe the 
places along the route of a hike and the ways in which the weather affected the hike. 
- 11 -
Question 4 produced a variety of responses with some weaker candidates resorting to a description of the 
picture rather than concentrating on telling a story. However, most candidates were able to integrate the 
picture quite well into their story and many candidates were able to produce interesting stories. 
Question 5 proved to be the most attractive question for most candidates since they could easily make a 
story from the scenario presented. Though some responses to this question had the stimulus quotation 
inserted without satisfactory integration into the plot, in most cases it was reasonably well done. 
In the case of Question 6, there was continuing improvement over previous years, indicating that 
candidates were better prepared to write a descriptive essay. It was also the case that the way in which the 
question was phrased allowed for more narrative into which candidates could fit their description. This 
year was the first time that performance on Question 6 exactly matched performance on Questions 4 and 
5. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
 
Teachers should continue to use pictures from varied sources, especially those dealing with current topics 
and themes in newspapers, to help stimulate and guide writing. This helps to make classroom writing 
interesting and should help students to focus on the use of details to create character, emotion and 
atmosphere. The creation of humour in writing is something that students might enjoy doing in their 
writing classes – how to tell a joke, how to write a joke, how to hold back the punch line are part of story￾writing that might interest even reluctant writers. 
Over the years, candidates have used the story lines in films they have seen as the basis for their short 
stories. However, even though originality in story line is not an absolute requirement, candidates should 
not get into the habit of slavishly copying other people‟s material. It may result in the copied parts of 
stories being discredited. 
In relation to integrating the given quotation into the story, teachers are advised to work more on logical 
development of plot, integration of story elements, along with the other story writing elements. 
Candidates whose stories are impressive are those who use relevant details to create atmosphere, mood 
and feelings. Training in short story writing must always stress the process – thinking, drafting, editing 
and proof reading. In preparing students for narrative writing, teachers should have students focus on 
sequence of events, verb tenses and adverbs and conjunctions of time.
For descriptive writing, students can be encouraged to imagine themselves using a camera and describing 
what they see through the lens as they move the camera gradually from left to right to take in the whole 
scene. Students need to get accustomed to the concepts ‘spatial’, ‘temporal’, and ‘sensory’, and to 
understand how these approaches bring order and meaning to their work. Critical reflection on 
their own writing may also be achieved through the analysis of / comparison with a range of 
excellent to poor examples of description. While it is necessary for teachers to get students accustomed 
to description by practising descriptive phrases and sentences with striking adjectives and adverbs, 
students should be wary about memorising flowery phrases and sticking them, willy-nilly, into descriptive 
essays. In order to prepare students for descriptive writing, teachers have to focus specifically on 
vocabulary enrichment. One way is by providing students with a list of adjectives, one of nouns and 
another of adverbs, and getting students to combine them in a relevant way as they describe specific 
scenes. Teachers need to make these lists cover all the senses – sight, smell, touch, hearing, and taste. 
- 12 -
SECTION FOUR (Expression) 
Questions 7 & 8
Question 7 asked candidates to write an essay giving their views on the statement Watching television, 
rather than reading, is the best way for children to broaden their knowledge. Question 8 asked candidates 
to present an argument either supporting or opposing the view that the government is wasting too much 
money buying school textbooks because the children are not reading them and that more money should be 
spent on computer equipment, which children prefer. 
Candidates did not demonstrate any significant difference in preference for the one or the other question. 
Performance in this section this year was significantly better than last year probably because the topics 
were very familiar and meaningful to most candidates. There was little difference in performance on the 
two questions. 
The good responses to Question 8 addressed both the matter of children‟s preference and the matter of the 
government investing money in the one or the other. The good responses to Question 7 addressed the 
advantages and disadvantages of both television and reading. 
Suggestions for teachers and students
In responding to arguments, whether in real life or in examination essays, it is necessary to address all 
aspects of the argument that are put forward; not answering a specific aspect suggests that you have a 
problem with that specific aspect. In any case, answers to arguments in examination essays have to be 
comprehensive since marks are assigned to the different parts of a question. In other words, if you omit
part of a question, you automatically lose marks assigned to it. 
While this section of the paper often gives topics which are of immediate interest to teenagers, students 
also need to keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interest. It is not always 
that topics close to the immediate and current experience of teenagers will be given in this section. 
Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially in the 
proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast 
and concession. Words and phrases such as „however‟, „although‟, „consequently‟, „by contrast‟, 
„accordingly‟ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as 
they often are. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2010
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright ©2010 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Paper 01, the multiple-choice paper, accounts for most of the Understanding component of the 
examination overall and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounts for all of the Expression 
component as well as part of the Understanding Component (all of Section 2 and part of Section 1). 
The distribution of marks for the two profiles (Expression and Understanding) across the two papers 
is as follows: 
 PAPER 01 PAPER 02 TOTAL 
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression _ 90* = 114+
 114+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+
 114+
 190+
 = 100% 
 
* raw score 
+ weighted score
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in January 2010 and in the two previous 
years is as follows: 
 
 2008 2009 2010 
 47.8 59.3 54.9 
The overall means for the examination (out of a total of 190) for the years 2008, 2009, 2010 are as 
follows: 
 2008 2009 2010 
 82.23 88.19 86.04 
Average performance over the last three years on the multiple-choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 
60 marks is as follows: 
 2008 2009 2010 
 26.41 27.31 24.44 
Average performance (2008–2010) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below: 
3 
Section 2008 2009 2010
Section A 
Summary Skills 11.51 14.15 11.13 (30) 
Section B 
Comprehension 6.82 8.60 10.11 (30) 
Section C 
Story Writing
Description
14.25 
12.21 
13.29 
10.24 
14.52 (35) 
13.70 (35) 
Section D 
Argument 13.52 13.55 13.77 (35) 
While candidates are encouraged to communicate in order to develop the facility to process and 
articulate ideas, there is a need for them to differentiate between the spoken language and that which 
is written, and to appreciate that Standard English has an international currency. CXC English A is an 
English Language examination and candidates are required, above all, to demonstrate competence in, 
and control of the English Language. 
Preparation for the examination must be a gradual process of developing skills, both receptive 
(comprehension) and productive (expression), in the English language. In the examination, these 
skills must be demonstrated in all areas: the proper use of punctuation marks, not only full stops and 
commas, but also colons and semi-colons, as well as other conventions of writing, such as inverted 
commas, capitalization, abbreviations, the writing of numbers, whether in figures or in words, correct 
spelling, proper sentence structure, and paragraphing. Critical reading and thinking skills need also to 
be integral parts of the regular class sessions, because without these skills the tasks of summary
writing, comprehension, argument or discussion are not easily managed. 
Teachers should capitalize on the current interests of the candidates and use topical regional and 
international issues to help them appreciate the value of effective language use, and to help them to 
build personal banks of ideas. It is important to remember that very few candidates are natural 
speakers of Standard English and therefore every learning opportunity should be used. 
Managing the examination is an area for which candidates need to be prepared. Candidates should be 
given strategies for interpreting and responding to tasks; for preparing simple outlines to guide their 
construction of responses; and for effectively editing their work. They need well rehearsed 
procedures for tackling each question. Candidates should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure 
of identifying the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy, and producing a fair copy. This is 
especially important in writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and in producing 
a cogent argument. It is only through repeated practice that each individual student will come to some 
understanding of the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy under examination 
conditions. The perception that the English Language examination is not an activity for which the 
candidate needs to prepare should be seriously rejected. 
4 
There are also some basic examination presentation strategies that candidates need to be reminded of: 
it is important to write so the work may be read; care should be taken in deleting and adding 
information. The use of liquid paper should be discouraged in favour of neat crossing out, since 
candidates frequently forget to insert new material in places where the liquid paper was used. 
Correct question numbering and page numbering help ensure that efforts are not misunderstood. 
The tasks in the examination are directly related, in most cases, to real-life skills. Employers and the
general public regard performance in English Language examinations as a measure of one’s ability to 
perform in the world of work. It should also be remembered that the sort of English required in an 
examination is different from what is normally spoken in every-day life. Preparation for the English 
examination is just as important as it is for any other subject 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Section A - Understanding and Expression
Question 1
Most candidates showed some evidence of overall understanding of the passage to be summarized, 
grasped the concept that ‘infertile soil’ was responsible for the food crisis and in most cases 
demonstrated the ability to pull out two points from it. Several good scripts exhibited good language 
use. Too many candidates, however, still do not know what is required in summary writing. A large 
number of candidates experienced expression problems; hence, communication of their ideas was
ambiguous or even contradictory. In addition, there was often a lack of cohesion. 
 There were very few superior scripts, and candidates evidently experienced several problems 
getting beyond initial understanding of the passage: though they understood the general drift 
of the passage, they clearly had difficulty with the details, and the way those details 
developed and interacted with the main point and thrust of the writing. 
 The habit of lifting and regurgitating chunks from the passage, without analysing the content, 
continues to be a problem. Teachers need to focus more on the need for interpretation and re￾expression of the meaning of what is read — not just changing of words (interpreting rather 
than translation).
 Exceeding the word limit is still a problem. More practice is needed in the strategies of 
achieving economy in writing, in selection of points, and in achieving focus. 
 Organization is another major problem since many candidates show a lack of ability to link
points and ideas logically. Many candidates are limited to the chronology in the original. 
Following are three summaries of the passage which give some idea of different approaches to 
presenting the critical information. 
Sample Summary #1
Various factors contribute to the world’s food crisis. These include pests and diseases, flood and 
drought, poor farming practices, the decreasing amount of cultivable cropland, and, most importantly, 
the increasingly poor quality of soil. Successful attempts have been made to improve seed quality but 
this has limited effect where the soil is poor. Producing better types of plants increased food for a 
5 
short while but failed because of soil. The world food crisis is usually seen as a result of bad 
marketing practices, but other things like water, diseases and soil must not be taken for granted, as is 
usually the case. Attention has been given to improving agricultural practices, but very little is done 
to improve the soil. 
(120 words)
Sample Summary #2
Seeds are improving but food production is falling because soils are deteriorating and people are 
going hungry. According to scientists better varieties resulted in the ‘green evolution’. Many years 
ago, improved plant varieties resulted in the ‘green evolution’. This led to the belief that the crisis 
was over. The hope was short-lived as fertile soil, a critical factor, was lacking. The present food 
crisis, intensified by natural disasters and diseases, could have been averted with the promotion of 
fertilizers in places like Africa. Although they practice modern agricultural techniques, governments 
and charities are not interested in funding projects to improve the quality of soil. 
(105 words)
Sample Summary #3
Although the quality of seeds is improving, soil is getting worse and there is currently a food crisis. 
Soil improvement is critical to solving this crisis. 
While it is true that the crisis is viewed in economic terms, a combination of environmental conditions 
also contributes to creating the desperate food situation. The chief problem is that fertile soil is 
needed to capitalize on the high quality seeds and plants developed through modern scientific 
methods. Research in soil improvement has been neglected because it does not capture the interest of 
governments and charities. They fail to realize that even the best quality seeds cannot flourish without 
good soil. Soil health is needed to avert a worse food crisis. 
(117 words)
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Competence in the techniques of summary is required: a grasp of the thesis; identification of the main 
points; logical organization in which the correct relationships are grasped and expressed, the ability to 
express the material in one’s own words, with an appropriate vocabulary; and completion within the 
word limit specified. In cases where the original is reproduced wholesale by the candidate, this is
interpreted as incompetence. 
Summarizing is a real-life skill (used, for example, by news reporters and policemen) and should be 
treated as such by teachers and candidates. In the case of business candidates who may be told that an 
executive summary preserves the words of the full document, this is not the case in English —
candidates must be able to show that they can use words that condense the ideas of the original, and 
words that can link sentences together smoothly so that the summary reads like a document in itself 
and not like a chopped-up version of another one. 
The examiners first determine whether the word limit has been exceeded. Words beyond the word 
limit are not considered. Consideration is next given to whether the candidate has understood and can 
clearly identify the main points in the passage and award marks accordingly. The examiners then 
assess whether the candidate has put those points together in an intelligible and logical manner using 
his/her own words and award marks accordingly. When candidates exceed the word limit, the marks 
may be reduced by as many as twenty per cent; when candidates use only the words in the original 
passage, the marks are automatically reduced by 33 per cent. 
6 
Care must be taken to preserve the meaning of the original, and to avoid the inclusion of extraneous 
material, personal opinion and commentary. In real life, such distortion would be seen as being 
unethical, and it could lead to wrong, unfair and disastrous decisions. 
Section B - Understanding 
Questions 2 and 3
Generally, candidates found the questions in this section within their reach, but there were many 
instances of candidates aiming to succeed by including everything in the section of the passage to 
which the question directs them, when in fact they are required to be specific. There were varied 
weaknesses in answers, most exhibiting vagueness, and problems with expression. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates 
Answers indicate a need for teachers to help students to develop accuracy and control, for example by 
 engaging students in much practice in interpreting and arriving at meaning and 
evidence 
 involving students in practice to develop the habit of focusing and discriminating 
 involving students in activities that develop their vocabulary so as to produce answers 
that are clear and concise 
 engaging students in recognizing the difference between literal and metaphorical 
language. 
The questions in this section are set in such a way that precise answers are required. Candidates 
should pay close attention to every word that is used and to the different ways in which questions are 
asked. Candidates are expected to give precisely what they are asked to give. Answers should be to 
the point. These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which 
requires a precise answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage usually results in zero 
being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidate’s responsibility to indicate clearly what the 
answer is; it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of possibilities given by 
the candidate. 
This section requires candidates to respond to different levels of meaning and to express their answers 
clearly. Candidates also need to do as each question asks: if it requires ‘a word’ or ‘a phrase’, then 
providing a sentence, for example, is often an indication that the student does not know exactly what 
the answer is. 
Section C - Expression 
Questions 4, 5 and 6
Performance in Section III was generally consistent with past years. There were a few superior scripts 
and also a few incompetent ones. Most of these came from Question 6 (description), as candidates 
7 
continue to ignore the requirement to describe, or to describe the scene and/or period that the question 
asks for. 
Of the three choices given in this section, the most popular was no. 5, the word prompt, while the least 
popular was no. 4, the picture stimulus. 
Question 4 
 
Question 4 required candidates to write a story based on a picture of a little girl hugging a boy. Both 
children were smiling. Many candidates were prompted to write expository pieces in response to this 
stimulus. 
Question 5 
This stimulus was very popular with candidates. It required them to write a story beginning with the 
sentences ‘He slammed the door behind him. He knew it would be for the last time.’ Performance was 
generally fair. 
Question 6 
Many responses suggested that candidates had not studied the instructions, and, as happened in earlier 
examinations, they wrote mainly narrative, with some description, from the start of the assignment, 
rather than focus on the specific time/place elements for description. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Candidates are advised that they should read the best story from preceding years in order to get a 
sense of what is required, but these stories should not be memorised and reproduced. In addition 
candidates should not disregard the word limit set; the longer the story, the greater the chance of 
grammatical and other errors occurring. Although the question papers state word limits as mainly 
approximations, the experience has been that the better candidates tend to write stories that fall within 
or not too far outside the word limit. Stories that stretch into four, five, six and more pages tend to be 
rambling, out of control and weak. 
Good stories demonstrate interesting storylines, characterization, good and effective use of details to 
create atmosphere and mood, and good and refreshing language use. Weak stories tend to be linear, 
mostly behaving like reports, with weak language. Candidates should try to improve their own 
techniques of story writing, including the effective use of dialogue and the contrast between 
characters, by studying good stories written by Caribbean and other authors. 
Candidates should use language that they can control. At times they use words and structures with 
which they are not really familiar. The result is that what they write is often verbose, stilted, 
sometimes unintelligible in parts and unimpressive. Teachers are encouraged to help candidates feel 
comfortable with the simplicity of language and the use of language that sounds and feels natural. 
Oral, spontaneous story-telling based, for instance, on photographs, sketches and proverbial 
statements could stimulate some interesting class productions – for listening, writing and peer 
interaction. 
Candidates continue to be unable to differentiate between exposition and description, or to create a 
piece in which the narrative overwhelms the descriptive. Although responses to this question have 
improved over the last three years, there are still too many candidates who are writing a story and not 
paying attention to the instructions given. 
8 
 Description must be clearly constructed and developed. (The different components must be 
detailed, then linked appropriately to create areas of focus; the relevant details must be 
logically and effectively sequenced; and then the different areas of focus and facets must be 
linked appropriately [e.g. background vs. foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail]).
 The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must be relevant to the descriptive 
elements. 
 Choice of features to be described must be clearly motivated and must effectively contribute 
to the whole picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be consistent within itself. 
 Any change in perspective (e.g. visual, mood, tone, etc.) must be clearly established. There 
should be varied and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as appropriate 
choice of words to create moods, tones, atmosphere and setting. 
 Candidates should be encouraged to improve their facility with adjectives and adverbs. 
Section D - Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
The performance in this section was similar to that of earlier examinations but some areas of concern 
continue to be noted. 
Question 7 
This question required candidates to argue for or against the choice of local food. This was not a 
popular choice. While the subject was very topical candidates seemed not prepared to present 
arguments and comment on local foods. Arguments were often undeveloped, lacking illustrative 
details and comparison. 
Question 8 
This was by far the more popular and the better done question. It required candidates to give their 
views on the banning of sexual and violent songs from radio and television. It was topical and 
candidates were able to take a balanced approach to responding. They advanced counter arguments to 
show other areas of blame for behaviour beside sexual and violent songs. 
Suggestions for Teachers and Candidates
Candidates need to note that skills of argument require both mastery of persuasive language and 
presentation of sound points, backed up by suitable examples. Providing information without using 
good argumentative techniques is a weakness; so is the reverse. Candidates should pay attention to 
‘tone’ and ‘audience’ and not indiscriminately use the language of debating in every argument they 
present. Candidates can learn different styles of argument by studying letters to the editor and 
editorials in newspapers as well as short, interesting articles in popular magazines or in the magazine 
section of newspapers.
9 
Candidates need to read the questions carefully and make sure they understand key words. They 
should then select their points, choose examples that support their points, and be consistent and clear 
in their presentation. Some candidates operate on the assumption (consciously or unconsciously) that 
they must agree with the opinion given and that if they do not, they will not receive high marks. The 
fact is, however, that the questions are deliberately set in such a way as to allow for differences of 
opinion and most likely if candidates state their real views, they will do better than if they merely 
agree with what they think is the examiners’ view or the socially acceptable view. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2010 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY
Copyright © 2010 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
– 2 –
GENERAL COMMENTS
The number of candidates writing the examination this year was approximately 100,000. 
Paper 01, the multiple choice paper, accounted for most of the Understanding component of the examination 
overall, and Paper 02, the free response paper, accounted for all of the Expression as well as part of the 
Understanding component (part of Question 1 and all of Questions 2 and 3).
The distribution of marks for the two profiles, Expression and Understanding, across the two papers is as 
follows: 
PAPER 01
Multiple Choice 
PAPER 02
Essay 
TOTAL
Understanding 60* = 46+
 40* = 30+
 76+
 = 40% 
Expression – 90* = 114+
 114+
 = 60% 
TOTAL 46+ 144+
 190+
 = 100% 
* raw score 
+
 weighted score 
The percentage of candidates attaining Grade III and above in the two papers this year, and the three 
previous years is as follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
49.01 (RoR*) 41.86 56.44 66.45 
 (T&T*) 49.56 
* Rest of Region 
* Trinidad and Tobago
The performance mean for the examination (out of a total of 190+
) for 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2010 is as 
follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
77.94 (RoR) 74.74 81.82 85.33 
 (T&T) 78.58 
Average performance (2007-2010) on the multiple choice paper (Paper 01) out of a total of 60 marks is as 
follows: 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
23.44 (RoR) 26.24 27.92 26.25 
(T&T) 26.98 
– 3 –
Average performance (2007–2010) in the component sections of Paper 02 is given below. 
2007 2008 2009 2010 
Section A 10.04 (30) 10.42 (30) (RoR) 10.69 (30) 14.57 (30) 
Summary Skills 8.78 (30) (T&T) 
Section B 15.45 (29) 8.84 (30) (RoR) 11.13 (30) 9.07 (30) 
Comprehension 12.98 (30) (T&T)
Section C 
Story Writing 13.62 (35) 13.29 (35) (RoR) 13.27 (35) 13.67 (35)
Description 14.25 (35) (T&T)
10.63 (35) 11.23 (35) (RoR) 13.30 (35) 11.42 (35)
13.82 (35) (T&T)
Section D 13.74 (35) 12.78 (35) (RoR) 14.44 (35) 13.28 (35) 
Argument 13.13 (35) (T&T)
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was satisfactory, with approximately 72 per cent of candidates achieving 
acceptable grades. Paper 01 assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through word choice, grammar 
and punctuation as well as meaning constructed from reading literature and opinions expressed in various 
forms. Candidates performed best on items requiring understanding of literary discourse, but were weakest 
on understanding informative discourse, grammar and mechanics. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
The summary expected from candidates writing the CSEC English A examination is one demanding the 
skills used in every-day situations where what is said or what is written may need to be put into a concise 
form. The summary should reflect the general depth and intention of the original while giving all of the 
necessary information in candidates’ own words. There are various approaches to writing summary and 
teachers need to expose students to these. One may simply follow the organization of the original, moving 
chronologically through the points. Summary may also begin with the conclusion and then show the line of 
reasoning and facts. The important requirement is that the correct relationships between the points must be 
maintained, so that the meaning is unchanged and clear. Additionally, while it is not necessary to capture 
every detail, it is important that vital information is not ignored. A good vocabulary is an asset that should 
be cultivated, since a summary must be rendered in one’s own words. 
The responses to the summary question continue to suggest that many candidates are not being taught the 
skills of summary writing. There is persistent wholesale or partial lifting. In a large number of instances 
where the main points are grasped, the summaries fail because not enough attention is given to organization 
and meaning. Large numbers of candidates continue to have problems comprehending the passages set. 
This is directly related to the lack of comprehension skills generally. Poor vocabulary, poor understanding 
– 4 –
of grammar and punctuation, weak grasp of connotative language, and weak reasoning are among the 
elements contributing to misinterpretation. Section A tests two elements: understanding and expression, 
hence the importance of comprehension skills. Candidates must not see ‘comprehension’ as a textbook 
activity, but as an essential part of daily life. 
Often the skill of paraphrasing is confused with summarizing — paraphrasing will generally increase, rather 
than reduce the length, so that in such cases many of the main points come outside of the word limit. 
Question 1
The summary passage on cassava proved to be generally manageable, based on a topic of which most 
candidates have some knowledge. There was a general improvement in candidates’ performance in writing 
the summary, with more candidates demonstrating those skills needed to show competence. However, the 
general weaknesses continued, with such responses reflecting the same problems that have been identified in 
the past: lack of understanding of the passage, the use of extraneous information, use of the language of the 
text, and overall weakness in the use of language. This year, like other years, there were many instances 
where candidates wrote letters and stories about cassava preparation and use in their own homes. Not only 
did they misunderstand or ignore the instructions, but they indicated a serious inability to address what was
asked, without permitting what was known to interfere. In instances where it was obvious that candidates 
were attempting to write in their own words, vocabulary deficiency was a problem. 
Section B: Comprehension
In Section B, there are two kinds of texts, representing the literary and the expository genres. The questions 
require precise answers rather than the general or vague. Candidates should pay close attention to every 
word that is used in the textual piece (prose, poetry, drama) and recognize the various levels of meaning. Of 
importance too, is the fact that questions are asked in various ways. Teachers need to ensure that in 
preparing students, they use the taxonomy to help them to become familiar with types of question words and 
meaning. In response to each question, candidates are expected to answer precisely what they are asked. 
These questions never require paragraph-long answers. Responding to a question which requires a specific 
answer by simply lifting a long extract from the passage is a bad strategy, one which usually results in zero 
being awarded for such an answer. It is the candidates’ responsibility to indicate clearly what the answer is; 
it is not the examiner’s responsibility to select it out of a number of possibilities given by the candidate.
Questions 2 and 3
Most candidates performed fairly well on this section, with Question 2 being the one with which candidates 
were more comfortable. Question 3 appeared to be more demanding. 
Questions that candidates found most challenging were 2(d), 3(c), 3(f), 3(g), and 3(h). All these questions 
required making judgements rather than lifting answers from the passage. Question 2(d) required the 
candidates not to simply list the occupations, or choose one, but to decide on the main occupation; Question 
3(c) required them to decide on not why ‘gut’ feeling has to be developed, but why it has to be ‘deliberately
developed’; 3(f) presented problems to candidates who simply lifted from the passage; 3(g) was a test of 
ability to derive the meaning of an unfamiliar word from its context; 3(h) required the ability to arrive at 
overall meaning and the writer’s intention in a passage. 
Section C: Story Writing 
It is recognized that candidates seem to read less than before, with each year-group reading less than the one 
before it. One reality is that the adult world supplies the student world with film, visual stories which reduce 
the need to read for pleasure or entertainment, and sometimes even for knowledge — there is no need to 
imagine, since the visual preempts this activity. However, the movie concretizes a story: there is character, 
setting, theme, conflict, climax; there are details, moods and tones. The movie gives opportunity for 
critique: what worked, why it did, where the situation was unrealistic, where and how could things have 
been improved? What would a sequel contain: what other perspectives are possible? What would you write 
– 5 –
if you wanted to convey the beauty, emotion or some other abstract aspect to someone who did not see the 
movie? Are the spoken words alone enough to help someone experience the power of the movie? This 
suggests that while we continue to persuade our candidates into reading, we need to accept their differences 
and make more use of their world to stimulate their minds and efforts. Different types of stimuli are 
provided in the examination for story writing — the more visual student is helped by a picture stimulus, but 
this kind of stimulus is not designed to exclude anyone. 
Candidates need to be encouraged to evaluate their own stories using a given set of criteria. The categories 
used in marking the examination are public. They are ‘incompetent’ including ranges 1 and 2, ‘competent’ 
including ranges 3 and 4, and ‘superior’, ranges 5 and 6. Teachers should help students to apply these 
categories in assessing their own efforts in the attempt to improve their skills. 
A negative practice clearly evidenced by candidates’ stories is that they prepare a story and are determined 
to write this story regardless of the stimuli given, or they tack the stimulus on to the final paragraph in the 
hope that it may be absorbed. In both instances, their responses are clearly incompetent, and assessed in this 
range. 
Questions 4 and 5
By far the more popular and better done was Question 5, but Question 4 was also attempted by many 
candidates. Overall, candidates continue to be poor to moderate in this section. The vast majority fell into 
the ‘competent’ group, mainly at the lower end of the mark scheme. There were only occasional 
exceptionally good scripts. The responses generally indicate weaknesses in story-writing techniques, as well 
as significant weaknesses in fundamental language competencies. 
Section C – Descriptive Writing
Comments made on Question 6 in previous years bear repeating here: description must be clearly 
constructed and developed, having the different components linked appropriately. Details must be logically 
and effectively sequenced. The different areas of focus must be linked appropriately (e.g. background vs. 
foreground; main focus vs. peripheral detail). The interpretive interventions (reflections) of the writer must 
be related to the purely descriptive elements. The choice of features to be described must be clearly 
motivated and must effectively contribute to the whole picture. Description, even if imaginative, must be 
consistent within itself: any change in perspective (time, perspective, mood, tone) must be clearly 
established. There should be varied and lively use of language to create picture elements as well as 
appropriate choice of words (nouns, verbs, concrete adjectives, adverbs) to create setting and atmosphere. In 
short, the object should be to enable the audience to see and to vicariously experience what is being 
described.
Question 6
Question 6 continues to be the least popular in Section C. Where it was attempted, too much narrative was 
included in the response. Among the weak responses, the descriptions were merely a listing of details, with 
little sense of the spatial or the other elements that would make the description meaningful. 
It is clear that the question is not yet achieving, to a significant degree, the purpose for which it was 
introduced — to provide an option to the story-writing questions. Only the exceptional candidates appear to 
perform well on this question, which suggests that the writing of description is not being given enough 
attention in classrooms. 
Section D – Argument 
This section tests candidates’ expression skills: how they organize thoughts for maximum effect, moving 
smoothly from one idea to another; how to express those views clearly and succinctly; how to use supporting 
elements; the techniques of audience appeal; the skill of reasoning and the ability to recognize and separate 
opinion from fact are among the skills assessed. Topics will be related to current social issues and elements 
– 6 –
which appeal to or fall within the experience of the student, but the skills of reasoning, whether in arguing 
for, against, or in giving one’s reasoned views should be acquired by using as wide a range of stimuli as 
possible. Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially 
in the proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, contrast 
and concession. Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by contrast’, 
‘accordingly’ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in fragments, as 
they often are. 
Question 7
This question presented challenges with interpretation. ‘Obedience’ was sometimes defined culturally as 
‘[having] manners’, and a variety of other positives such as ‘trustworthiness’ and ‘submissiveness’. The 
examination is a test of candidates’ ability to use Standard English as an international currency. While the 
foregoing kind of answer is not completely ‘wrong’, is it at best only a partial satisfaction of the appropriate 
task.
Question 8
The topic, ‘Sexual and violent songs’ produced scripts that never lacked content; candidates who attempted 
this question had much to write, so they did well in Area 1, but many experienced problems with Area 2. 
The topic ‘Caribbean doctors’ produced fairly good responses and some of the arguments were very good. 
Candidates made many interesting points and showed good language control. 
Recommendations for Teachers
Teachers should:
 Help candidates to see the relevance of the various areas of study to the immediate and future 
quality of their lives. 
 Teach for and encourage transfer of knowledge and skills. 
 Encourage candidates to see and respect the differences in the language varieties they speak and 
hear. 
 Help candidates to understand the need, on the one hand, for Standard English mastery as their 
international currency, and on the other, the value of their own dialect in identifying with the local 
and regional space.
 Facilitate and encourage reading by using various strategies: teach English Language through 
English Literature or other study texts. 
 Not teach for the examination but teach strategies for tackling the examination — the skill of 
outlining to improve organization and succinctness; the allocation of time; how to make corrections; 
the importance of correct numbering and how to interpret questions are some examples.
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2011 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The examination in January 2011 followed the same format as in previous years. Paper 01 — the 
multiple-choice paper — tested the Understanding profile, and Paper 02 — the free response 
paper — tested both the Understanding and Expression profiles. 
Performance remained stable in January 2011. Fifty-four per cent of candidates achieved Grades 
I–III. This was consistent with overall performance in January 2010 when the percentage of 
candidates who achieved this level stood at 55 per cent. The percentage of candidates at the 
Grade I level increased to 9.13 in 2011 from 7.08 in 2010, and 7.7 in 2009. There was significant 
improvement in the performance on Profile I — Understanding, and a more modest improvement 
on Profile II — Expression. 
Most students produced scripts that fell within the levels of suggesting or demonstrating 
competence. There were only a few superior scripts at one end, and also a few incompetent 
scripts at the other. This seems to indicate a need for teaching to focus more on improving the 
quality of students' general understanding and writing skills. 
This target can be achieved through careful reading and critical thinking that leads to the 
synthesis of ideas, and more exposure to a wide range of topics that allows for garnering ideas 
and information for further use. The goal should be to widen the students‘ experiences with good 
models. 
Equal focus must be placed on both what is written and how it is written. The latter goes beyond 
the mechanics of writing in terms of correct use of grammar to also include greater focus on
choice of words, tone and perspective or writer's stance. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was good, with approximately 79 per cent of candidates achieving 
Grades I and II. The mean on this paper was 30.57 out of a weighted total of 46. Paper 01 
assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through word choice, grammar and punctuation as 
well as meaning constructed from reading literature, informational text and opinions expressed in 
various forms. Candidates performed best on items requiring understanding of literary discourse. 
Retrieving explicitly stated information and ideas, and making straight forward inferences were 
well done. 
3 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1
This question requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and reproduce its meaning 
concisely and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak responses 
indicate usually major problems with understanding the passage, and with the ability to express 
meaning in the candidate‘s own words (synthesis). Many candidates try to succeed by lifting 
chunks or ‗cutting and pasting‘ them together in ways that indicate attempts to hide the fact that 
they are reproducing the words of the passage. Teaching should concentrate on helping students 
to grasp and reproduce meaning. Exercises in equivalent sentences are useful, and can be 
extended beyond one sentence to a paragraph, and further. Practice in comprehension that 
involves interpretation (not just re-wording) — executed both orally and in writing, is likely to 
be also very useful. 
Summarizing involves two major processes: information gathering (reading, identifying and 
interpreting what is relevant) and information giving (synthesizing, organizing and writing). 
Teaching must move beyond 'identifying points' to include understanding how the text is 
organized. Focusing on text organizational patterns such as cause and effect, problems and 
solution, before and after, and similar developmental strategies can lead students to greater 
comprehension and synthesis of information before they begin to write. 
The summary question is awarded a total of 30 marks, evenly distributed among three areas: 
 Understanding (Content) 
 Organization 
 Expression 
The text in January consisted of information with which most candidates would be familiar, and 
their answers generally indicated that they understood the contents. It is in this area —
understanding — that candidates continue to score well. Generally the instruction to write in 
continuous prose is observed. However, two problems persist. One of these is the practice of 
lifting the language of the text, apart from the permitted use of technical expressions. It now 
seems to be the norm to ignore the instruction to express the meaning as far as possible in your 
own words. The second is the continued ignoring of the prescribed length by a high percentage 
of candidates, despite repeated warnings that marks will be lost. Any points coming after the 
4 
word limit of 120 words are not rewarded. In fact, the need to go over the limit suggests that 
candidates are not as capable as they might be in organizing their thoughts, so they can also 
expect a lower mark under Organization. Satisfactory answers to this question 
- identified the theme/subject, and the thesis or general thrust of the discussion 
- located the specific issue and the reasons for focusing on this issue 
- identified the causes of the problem (general and specific) 
- examined specific areas by definition, recognition of causes and effects 
- described the outlook for the future and the reasons for those views. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- While students MUST use their own words, ―in your own words‖ does not require 
avoidance of key words of the passage. The technical jargon (scientific terms, 
specialized vocabulary) of some passages cannot be avoided when students are 
writing summaries. 
- Students need to undertake extensive practice in organizing their answers, using 
transition words to help the reader with understanding and readability and using 
simple, correct language. 
- Students should be reminded that to reuse the words of the passage entirely (whether 
as a whole chunk or by joining phrases from all over) attracts no marks — as the 
student has not presented any of his/her own words for assessment. Staying within 
the word limit is another area for practice. 
- Engage students in more close-reading exercises — paying closer attention to writer's 
intention. 
- The internal structure of the passage should be emphasized and organizational 
patterns reinforced so that students understand the importance of cohesion and 
coherence. 
- Emphasize the teaching of paragraph cohesion and the use of appropriate transitions 
and connectives. 
- Build vocabulary and spelling skills to help with comprehension. 
5 
- Students should be taught the critical elements for superior organization and 
language: transitional phrases and the value to achieving economy; using appropriate 
transitions; avoiding arbitrary use. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Questions 2 and 3
Candidates demonstrated knowledge of the requirements of Questions (a) to (d) which largely 
required recalling information explicitly stated in the passages. It was evident that most 
respondents had a good understanding of what the extracts were about and therefore could give 
correct responses to the questions that did not test higher-order skills involving evaluating or
synthesizing information. Evaluating content, language and textual elements proved difficult in 
some instances. 
 
The individual parts that proved challenging for Question 3 were (e), (f), (g) and (h). While 
candidates understood the nature of the questions, they struggled to analyse and synthesize the 
information and to link it to the writers' overall meaning. Question (h) in particular proved most 
difficult for candidates. This required them to draw a conclusion from the last three sentences of 
the passage. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- The teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined with the teaching of summary 
writing as both require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
- Students should be helped to be more focused on interpretation, more discriminating in their 
answers; more concerned with answering what is asked, not what is usually asked. 
- As with Section A, much practice is advised in reading, listening, and reproducing meaning; 
in interpreting meaning at different levels; and in paying attention to accuracy. 
- Practice in vocabulary building that involves not lists of words, but discerning meaning in 
context, is advised; practice in producing and responding to varied plausible responses helps 
students to ‗see‘ how writing may be interpreted, but there should also be insistence on 
accuracy in cases where some answers are not plausible responses to a stimulus or not 
supported by the passage. 
6 
- Developing sensitivity to how words and sentences work in the language is important, so that 
students rise above the level of seeing comprehension as guesswork or ‗anything goes‘. 
Section C: Story Writing and Descriptive Essay 
Question 4
The picture stimulus was well interpreted by candidates. It evoked various scenes and events 
involving the character in the picture. The facial expression was often interpreted as grief, pain, 
loss or some suffering that the character experienced. 
Question 5
The stimulus on which candidates were to base their story was ―Kenia considered the plan she 
had made. She looked around sadly, then nodded. It was the best decision‖. Most responses were 
pre-occupied with rape/sex and the abuse of teenagers by family members. The tales often lost 
sight of the stimulus, which was not effectively used. Candidates had difficulty integrating the
stimulus into their narratives, so that most often it was 'tacked on' at the end. 
Question 6
Candidates were required to describe the scenes and atmosphere in a stadium based on the 
stimulus ―The huge crowd rose to its feet as the athletes entered the stadium‖. Candidates were 
able to relate to the activities and events in a stadium. Most were often able to (though not in 
great detail) describe the ‗atmosphere‘ and ‗scenes‘, and very often successfully appealed to the 
readers' senses. 
Generally, the question continues to pose challenges for candidates who have not mastered the 
writing of a descriptive essay. Their responses fall into the realm of the narrative which is the 
genre of writing tested in Questions 4 and 5. There were some instances of misinterpretation of 
the 'time frame' of incidents/events/scenes. In some instances, there was no focus on the athletes. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
- While there were some highly competent and superior scripts in response to Question 6, most 
scripts continue to be unsatisfactory mostly because students ignore the rubric. 
- Students need to be taught how to write a descriptive essay, and to recognize (not simply told 
or shown) differences between it and a story. One way in which this can be done is by an 
7 
immersion strategy involving reading and writing descriptive essays, and similar immersion 
in stories, some of which will involve description, but are not simply descriptive essays. 
- A descriptive essay allows for creativity in the same way the story does. Candidates may 
impose their own interpretation (so long as it is valid), and create their own scenes based on 
valid interpretation of the subject. Within the scene they can create different elements or 
aspects. 
- Teachers are advised to treat the writing of description as a writing experience into which 
they put in as much preparation as they do for story writing — and encourage every student 
to write a number of descriptive essays until they know how to do them. This is more 
advisable than the practice of preparing students for stories only, thus closing an option that 
they might well have found interesting and suited to their interests and abilities. 
- A danger in teaching ‗story‘ only is that the stimulus set in the exam may not appeal strongly 
to a particular student and so may only evoke a mediocre response. Full exposure and 
teaching give the students a fair chance to do well. 
 
Section D: Persuasive Writing 
More candidates did Question 7 which required them to give their views on the need for special
institutions for bullies, than Question 8 which required an argument for or against the testing of 
school students for HIV, with or without their parents‘ consent. 
Candidates were familiar with the subject of ‗bullying‘ in schools. Candidates spent most of the 
time dealing with bullying — the behaviour, the causes and the effects and sharing anecdotes 
from personal experiences. The focus should have been whether there should be an institution for 
those given to bullying. 
Candidates responded well to Question 8 whether they were supporting or opposing the view. 
The words ‗with or without consent‘ used in the question posed a challenge for some candidates. 
Many candidates did not establish a clear position in their line of argument. 
Suggestions for Teachers in Addressing Weaknesses 
 
- Strategies such as listening to and presenting arguments followed by peer critiquing of 
arguments are usually useful. 
8 
- The writing and presentation of papers and speeches are also useful, as are debates, advice 
corners, improvised situations such as talk-shows, and other means of promoting thoughtful 
speech and writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2011 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance this year was fair and compares favourably with the previous two years. The 
percentage of candidates who achieved Grades I−III was 67 compared with 66 in 2010 and 56 in 
2009. The overall mean was 88 compared with 85 in 2010 and 82 in 2009. Generally, the 
incidence of students being wholly unprepared for the examination was small, so that answers 
suggesting or demonstrating incompetence were fewer. When the examination is taken as a whole, 
there is some improvement, but individual questions reveal fluctuations in the quality of 
performance. 
While candidates seem to be taught the aspects of the syllabus which are examined, some 
candidates do not demonstrate the quality of skills that produce excellent responses. Most 
responses fall into the category of being adequate. There is strong evidence that questions/stimuli 
are not read carefully and not fully thought through. This results in many misinterpretations and 
inadequate responses. 
The following examples are indicative of this. Section D this year included a stimulus that required 
students to express their views on the issue of banning the import of fruits and vegetables, in order 
to support local agriculture. Attention was drawn to a response which replaced the word import
with export, used the word repeatedly and with confidence throughout the essay, and so missed the 
issue entirely. Equally concerning was the inclination of some candidates, in responding to 
Question 5 in Section C, to choose one of the indeterminate objects in the background of the 
picture and to make the story revolve around that, rather than around anything that was 
foregrounded. 
There are still instances of candidates answering more than one question. Not only is this a poor 
examination strategy, since it takes time away from other questions, but it suggests that candidates 
do not take care to read or study the instructions. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 — Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. The mean mark on this paper was 30 out of 46 
compared with 26 in 2010 and 28 in 2009. Candidates generally performed well on items of word 
choice, grammar and mechanics and on comprehension passages based on informative, literary and 
persuasive discourse. Items presenting difficulty were those requiring evaluation of the 
effectiveness of language devices such as irony, innuendo and symbolism as well as evaluating 
appropriate use of code and style in relation to the author’s intention. 
Paper 02 — Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1
This question required candidates to demonstrate both understanding and expression skills. The 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific 
discussions, analyses). The skills of selection and concise expression are targeted. Included in the 
- 3 -
syllabus is the following advice: Summaries require economy of language, the careful selection of 
the relevant main ideas, and the preservation of the intention of the original.
While most candidates managed to select the appropriate information for their answers, of that 
group, only a small minority showed mastery of the skill of writing clearly and concisely, in their
own words. Fewer candidates still, were able to maintain the correct relationships while 
reorganizing their points for brevity. They clung steadfastly to both the pattern and the language of 
the original, a strategy that often worked against conciseness. Most candidates continued to lift the 
points entirely. Often, connectives were not used so cohesion was lost. There were extreme cases 
where candidates’ concept of summary was to simply copy the first 120 words of the passage. 
The mean for the summary this year was 14 out of 30 compared with 15 in 2010 and 11 in 2009. 
The passage this year appears to have been well within candidates’ reach, and they scored 
reasonably well in the content area. Following the original organization slavishly, led to answers 
that exceeded the limit and so candidates lost marks. Failure to use their own language also earned 
low marks. Those candidates who performed in the range 9 –18 selected relevant details but 
generally did not maintain the original focus. 
A close look at the syllabus section Notes and Suggested Activities (specifically pages 6 –12) will 
help both teacher and student to identify and hone summary skills. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Section B is designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one 
expository. The skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) 
(pages 2–3). Weaker candidates responded well mainly to the first three of the ten objectives under 
(b) – recognizing facts stated explicitly, extracting specific and implied information. 
Question 2
The literary passage dealt with a children’s activity, hide-and-seek. The mean mark on this 
question was 7 out of 15. Part (a) asked simply for the name of the game. Examiners recognized 
that the game was called differently in the various countries, and these names were accepted. 
Part (c), which required deducing meaning, was frequently incorrectly answered as candidates were 
unable to go beyond the literal and repeated the answer for the previous question. The parts most 
answered incorrectly or omitted were (e), (f), (g) and (i). In (g), it was not recognized that a 
conflict must involve at least two elements. Similarly candidates failed to capture two sides of the 
oxymoron in (i). Questions relating to appropriateness of tone, connotative meaning and writer’s 
craft were not well answered. 
Question 3 
The mean mark for this question was also 7 out of 15. 
The problem parts were (f) where there was an inability to draw the inference, and (h) where again 
there was an inability to grasp and explain the oxymoron. It was noted that fewer candidates 
attempted to lift segments of the passage and tried to answer every question; there were fewer 
instances of no response. 
- 4 -
Candidates continue to ignore the use of the term phrase, and give instead full sentences or even 
paragraphs, and so lose marks. This prompts the reiteration of the need to teach students to study 
the requirements of individual questions. 
Section C: Story Writing 
This year, Question 4 was the most popular. Question 6 was the least popular in this section. The 
stories demonstrated generally that competence in writing standard English is weak. 
Question 4
This question used a picture of an elderly man playing a guitar as a stimulus. Candidates seemed 
generally comfortable with the picture stimulus. It prompted stories with good characterization and 
emotional involvement. Story lines tended to be similar, but those scoring the higher marks 
managed to create conflict or relationships with grandchildren, and tended to use symbolism. 
Reflection and flash back techniques were also attempted. The mean mark was 13 out of 35. 
Question 5 
This question was better handled. It was based on the stimulus A cold hand grasped his wrist as he 
slumped to the ground. Many candidates made unconvincing use of the stimulus often tacking it 
on to the end or barely including it in the story. The mean mark was 15 out of 35. 
Question 6 
This question was a challenge largely because candidates seemed unfamiliar with the word 
pedestrian. The question was based on the stimulus The streets were filled with pedestrians in 
anticipation of their new leader. Another challenge was also the need to describe mood and 
atmosphere, so that a significant number of answers scored between 10 and 13 marks. This year 
saw some resurgence of the tendency towards narration rather than description. At the same time, 
those candidates who understood the requirements wrote very good pieces. The mean mark for this 
question was 12 out of 35. 
Section D: Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
Both of these questions should have been quite suitable given the demands of the syllabus. The 
content required to respond to them should have been sufficiently within candidates’ experience. 
Question 7 required candidates to write an essay giving their views on the topic The government 
should ban the importation of all fruits and vegetables in support of local production. Question 8 
required an argument supporting or opposing the view that Hungry students cannot learn. Free 
lunch should be provided for all secondary school students.
Each question was structured in such a way that there were two parts to be linked to produce an 
acceptable response. This presented a major difficulty for large numbers of candidates who failed 
to create necessary links between the two parts; for example, candidates might argue hungry 
students cannot learn OR free lunch should be provided. 
Some of the responses were quite long − in several cases two or three pages, well over the word
limit. In addition, many candidates had ideas but did not have the language skills necessary to 
- 5 -
articulate those ideas well. The mean mark for Questions 7 and 8 were 16 and 14 out of 35, 
respectively. 
Recommendations for Teachers 
• It is clear that hundreds of students across the Caribbean have not mastered the use of 
Standard English. There continues to be interference from dialects and patois used 
throughout the region; to these have been added the slangs originating from dancehall music 
and the North American ghettos and the abbreviations familiar to users of the messaging 
media of modern technology. For students who almost abhor reading, some methods must 
be found to encourage correct use of the language. 
• Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when 
summarizing and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their 
responses into a coherent whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to introduce 
these words into the active vocabulary of students. Practice in construction shifts and 
equivalent sentences would be useful. 
• The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
• Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and in attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words 
and sentences work in the language is important. 
• Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through regular reading of good 
literature. This includes attention to paragraphing, grammar, spelling, diction and other 
conventions of writing. 
• Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story￾writing and descriptive writing. 
• Greater use should be made of literature to teach writing−immersion into how stories work. 
• Strategies should be engaged to provide individual help to students so that personal needs 
can be addressed. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2012 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance in the January examination was moderate. Most candidates produced competent scripts. 
Very few superior scripts were in evidence, and, at the other end, there was no startling number of 
incompetent scripts. What the examination results suggest, particularly through the questions which call 
for reading and understanding, is that most candidates‘ reading is superficial. As a result, candidates miss 
what is being asked when they need to study and respond to questions. Research has established that poor 
reading and comprehension skills lead to poor writing skills. There is much need for teaching to focus 
more on improving the quality of students‘ general understanding and writing skills. 
This target can be achieved through encouraging discussion, interactive reading where students are taught 
how to question what they read and to let themselves feel free to interpret or reinterpret the texts, more 
exposure to a wide range of topics and styles of writing, that allows the garnering of ideas and 
information for further use — in short, seek to widen the students‘ experiences with good models. Equal 
focus must be placed on what is written and how it is written. All of this is even more crucial since in our 
technologically advanced environment and instant solutions, our students are encouraged to be very 
visual. There is no need, or time, to imagine; they are accustomed to being given the interpretations. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. Seventy-six per cent of candidates achieved scores at the level 
of Grades I-III. The mean score for the paper was 26 out of a weighted total of 46. Candidates performed 
fairly well on Questions 1–20 which assessed understanding of meaning conveyed through grammar and 
mechanics. Questions 21–28 assessed understanding of literary text, sampled by a poem and candidates 
showed good understanding of the details of the poem, as well as the tone of the poet. Performance on 
the narrative passage was also good while on the expository passage, performance was fair. Candidates 
were generally able to recognize cause and effect, identify main ideas and draw conclusions. The weakest 
performance was noted on Questions 43–60 which assessed understanding of persuasive text. Candidates 
were unable in instances to distinguish fact from opinion and to identify language devices used by the 
writer.
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1 
This question requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and reproduce its meaning concisely 
and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak scripts usually indicate 
major problems with understanding of the passage, and with ability to express meaning in the candidate‘s 
own words (synthesis). The summary question is awarded total marks of 30, evenly distributed under 
three headings: Understanding (Content), Organization, and Expression. Generally, candidates did not 
show any great difficulty in responding to this question, particularly in understanding the content. 
However, weak responses indicated a lack of the basic skills of summary writing — using one’s own 
words without changing the meaning of the passage. ‗Lifting‘, as the examiners term the partial or 
wholesale use of words of the passage, is therefore common. This is a major difficulty, and one which 
causes candidates to lose considerable marks under Expression. Some candidates attempt to use their own 
words, but are seriously handicapped by poor vocabulary. 
3 
Particular effort needs to be taken to teach strategies for organization. Most candidates choose to follow 
the order of the original text, and this often prevents them from achieving a shorter piece of writing. It is 
most important that students be taught to recognize the relationship and the links between the main ideas 
in the passage, so that they are not tied to copying the movement of the passage. 
Candidates continue to ignore word limits, provide irrelevant details, unnecessary examples, and present 
information that was not provided in the passage. A major tendency is to write in short paragraphs. It is 
necessary to remind candidates that the summary has no single topic sentence, and should really be a 
paragraph which pulls together the essence of several paragraphs. There is a rich section on the kind of 
activities that can foster the necessary summary skills included in the English A syllabus. 
The passage set for January 2012 dealt with our dependence on fossil fuel, oil. The summary expected 
should have included: 
- The disadvantages of dependency on oil 
- The advantages offered by renewable energy 
- The challenges to be faced if renewable energy sources are to be successfully used. 
Below are examples of summaries that could illustrate what was expected of candidates. 
Sample Summary No. 1 
The high price of oil has caused us to look for alternative sources of energy, which can be produced at a 
lower cost and are now environmentally friendly. Using renewable energy sources, which are resources 
that never run out, offers many advantages. They are usually indigenous to a country and so reduce the 
need for foreign exchange, do not pollute the environment, have a multitude of applications and can be 
accessed anywhere. However, the cost of implementing the use of renewable energy is very high. To 
successfully develop its production and use, large investments are needed. There must be policies that 
provide incentives, such as reducing import duties and selling excess electricity. 
Sample Summary No. 2 
The world is dependent on oil which is a non-renewable resource. We suffer because oil producing 
countries often raise the price, and our fuel costs also rise. In addition, oil production is not 
environmentally friendly. Developing renewable energy offers advantages. Since it comes in several 
forms, a variety of ways of producing it is possible, even in remote places. It costs less than oil, is more 
environmentally friendly and saves foreign exchange as there is no need to import. Developing 
renewable energy, however, is difficult. It demands much capital investment. Policies that help by 
creating incentives to invest, produce and use renewable energy, are also needed. 
Section B: Comprehension 
Questions 2 and 3 
There were two types of passages used in this section — the literary and the expository. What was seen 
was a marked difference in the performance of candidates on Question 2 and 3. The inclusion of literary 
questions and the interpretation of the writer‘s style in Question 3 proved to be difficult for many 
candidates. 
4 
Candidates' Performance on Question 2 
The passage was taken from Harriet’s Daughter, a former English B text. It addressed the narrator‘s 
mixed feelings towards her father who, in her opinion, is disdainful of his Black heritage. Fifteen marks 
were allocated to a total of eight questions on the passage, one question being subdivided into two parts.
The language of the passage was appropriate for this academic level.
Candidates were able to identify the occupation (a) and views (b) (i) of the narrator‘s father and were also 
able to recognize irony (c) and sarcasm (f). Questions which required candidates to identify and 
understand attitude (b) (ii) and feelings (g) were not well answered. Similarly, although they were able to 
correctly select an expression showing sarcasm, candidates were unable to use the context of the passage 
to arrive at the meaning of the sarcastic phrase ―he’s so concerned about being coloured…‖
It was commendable that most candidates attempted even those questions (e), (g) (h) which apparently 
were challenging to them. Teachers should continue to encourage such efforts. With regard to developing 
higher level skills of comprehension, regular class and group discussions on appropriate passages will 
help students not only to identify, but to understand and articulate attitudes, feelings and tone. 
Candidates' Performance on Question 3 
Generally, candidates appeared to understand the passage, but they struggled to analyse and synthesize 
the responses and linked them to the writers' overall meaning. The mean on this question was 6 out of 15 
marks. Weaker candidates had difficulty on Parts (c), (e), (f) (g). In Part (c), although the answer 
appeared clearly in the second line of paragraph two, candidates tended to use peripheral information. 
The term ‗bedrock‘ in Part (f) should have been understood from the context in the passage, but proved to 
be a hurdle for many; and question (g) saw many candidates either misinterpreting the question, or 
attempting to answer by lifting the entire statement containing the words used in the statement. 
Recommendations for Teachers
Here last January‘s comments bear reiteration, the teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined 
with the teaching of summary writing as both require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
Summary writing goes another step, but understanding is the primary stage. It is suggested that students 
be helped to be more focused on interpretation; to be more discriminating in their answers; and to 
recognize what is asked, not what is usually asked. Benefits can be had from practice in vocabulary 
building that involves not lists of words, but discerning meaning in context; practice in producing and 
responding to varied plausible responses helps students to ―see‖ how writing may be interpreted. There 
should also be insistence on accuracy in cases where some answers are not plausible responses to a 
stimulus or supported by the passage. Developing sensitivity to how words and sentences work in the 
language is important, so that students rise above the level of seeing comprehension as guesswork or 
‗anything goes‘. 
Section C: Story Writing and Descriptive Essay 
There was a noticeable increase in the number of candidates who wrote on topics that were not given on 
the examination paper. Although some responses demonstrated competence in English, the candidates 
failed to score because they did not use the stimulus. Most scripts fell within the range of suggesting 
competence to low levels of demonstrating competence. 
5 
Question 4 
The mean on this question was 12 out of a total of 35 marks. The picture stimulus was not well 
interpreted. In some instances candidates did not focus their writing sufficiently on the foreground of the 
picture to develop their stories. 
 
Question 5 
This question required a response to the following stimulus: ―Martine and Sam huddled in the scanty 
shelter, looked back at what was left of their house and wondered what to do next.‖ Write a story which 
includes these words. While their language was competent, many candidates failed to answer the 
question. The mean on the question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
Question 6 
Generally, this question continues to pose challenges for candidates who have not mastered the writing of 
a descriptive essay. As in the past, most responses continue to use narrative as the vehicle for description. 
However, techniques such as moving in an orderly fashion over the scene, of widening or narrowing the 
view, are being used more than before, which is an encouraging feature. More work needs to be done on 
encouraging students to let characters contemplate, internalize, and reflect on the scenes suggested, so as 
to include feelings and reactions in the response to the task. The mean on the question was 13 out of 35 
marks. 
Section D: Persuasive Writing
The topics were within candidates‘ scope of knowledge. Nevertheless, both topics were not fully argued
and explored from an informed position. Too few ‗tools of argument‘ were employed. Weak responses 
indicated a lack of a clear position on the topics.
Question 7 
Candidates were required to write an essay supporting the views of either of two speakers based on 
whether homework was a waste of time or a rewarding activity and necessary for success in life. This 
question was the more widely chosen of the two options. The mean was 13 out of 35 marks. In many 
instances, candidates merely stressed the idea that homework is good practice while largely ignoring the 
part of the question that asked about its relationship to success in life. There were a few candidates who 
disagreed, but were unable to give valid or meaningful reasons for their disagreement. 
Question 8 
Candidates were required to give their views on whether it should be mandatory for all secondary school 
students to participate in extra-curricular activities as a requirement for graduation. There were varied 
interpretations of ‗extra-curricular‘. Some candidates did not appear to fully understand the meaning of 
the expression. As was the case with Question 7, the last part of the question was largely ignored. Some 
candidates dealt with why it is good to participate in extracurricular activities, but did not make the 
connection with its requirement for graduation. The mean on the question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
6 
Suggestions for Teachers in Addressing Weaknesses 
Strategies such as listening to and presenting arguments followed by peer critiquing of arguments are 
usually useful. Writing and presentation of papers and speeches are also useful, as are debates, advice 
corners, improvised situations such as talk shows, and other means of promoting thoughtful speech and 
writing. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
®
EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2012 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS 
General performance this year declined when compared with the 2011 results. The percentage of candidates 
who achieved Grades IIII was 48 compared with 67 in 2011 and 66 in 2010. The overall mean was 77 
compared with 88 in 2011, and 85 in 2010. The incidence of candidates being apparently wholly 
unprepared for the examination was higher than that of May/June 201l. Answers suggesting or 
demonstrating incompetence were higher in specific sections. 
Generally, candidates appeared to have been taught the various aspects of the syllabus, but were unable to 
demonstrate the quality of skills that produce excellent responses. Most responses continue to fall into the 
category of being adequate. There remains strong indication that questions are not read carefully and not 
fully thought through, resulting in misinterpretation and inadequate responses. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 — Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was satisfactory. Candidates generally continue to perform well on items of word 
choice, grammar and mechanics and on comprehension passages based on informative and persuasive 
discourse, and less well on literary items. Items presenting difficulty were those requiring recognition and 
evaluation of language devices such as irony and symbolism, as well as evaluating the use of connotative 
language and the choice of style in relation to the author‘s intention. The mean on this paper was 55 per 
cent compared to 64 per cent in 2011 and 57 per cent in 2010. 
Paper 02 — Free Response 
Section A: Summary 
Question 1 
This question required candidates to demonstrate skills in understanding, organization and expression. The 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific discussions, 
analyses) suitable to the secondary school age-group. The skills of selection and concise expression are 
targeted. The specific objectives are detailed in the syllabus under Understanding (a) and (b) and Expression 
(a), (b), (c). Included in the syllabus is the following advice: Summaries require economy of language, the 
careful selection of the relevant main ideas, and the preservation of the intention of the original (page 11).
The passage selected for May/June 2012 was considered to be well within the reading abilities of candidates. 
It was taken from a magazine article and required that candidate summarize a person‘s reflection on a very 
topical matter. The content focused on the nature of modern living, its negative consequences, and possible 
ways to avoid such consequences. The content of the passage was perceived to be familiar to candidates at 
this level, but many of them distorted the meaning of the passage or gave their own views on the topic. 
Only the very competent candidates managed to capture all the points made. 
Weakness in selecting the crucial elements was exacerbated by lack of vocabulary when candidates 
attempted to use their own language. The age-old error of ‗lifting‘ persists, and judging from the prevalence 
and persistence of this problem, it appears strongly that students are being taught to lift. This report draws 
attention to plagiarism, and stresses how vital it is for candidates to stay clear of the practice. A significant 
contributor to the candidates‘ difficulty is the apparent belief that the topic sentence of a paragraph must 
always come at the start of the paragraph. This belief is wrong and following it causes candidates to focus 
on minor features. As in the past, few candidates were able to maintain the correct relationships while 
reorganizing their points for brevity. They continued to cling steadfastly to both the pattern and the 
language of the original, a strategy that will work against conciseness. Candidates can be helped to learn 
how to. 
- 3 -
 differentiate between topic and supporting sentences 
 recognize the relationship between main points (cause and effect, solutions, alternatives) 
 distinguish between explanations, illustrations, etc. and the main point 
 determine when explanation is vital to good summary 
 test their summaries for over-generalization. 
The nature of summary (of the length required from candidates in the examination) is such that it eliminates 
all topic sentences, combining the information into a general thought (thesis). The candidate should 
therefore produce a single coherent paragraph. A close look at the syllabus section, Notes and Suggested 
Activities (specifically pages 6–12), will help both teacher and student to identify and hone summary skills. 
Strong support is also given in the new Nelson Thornes CXC English A Study Guide. 
Section B: Comprehension
Section B is designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one expository. The 
skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) (pages 2–3). Each passage has a 
different focus: in the expository type of passage the objectives are outlined in (a) and (b); in the other –
literary discourse – the greater number of questions satisfy Understanding (c). The results for Question 2 
strongly suggest that reading and analysing writing of a literary nature needs to be given more attention. 
Pages 12–14 of the syllabus should be invaluable. Where questions require information obvious in the text, 
candidates gain marks, but fail to read between the lines, understand inference, purpose, techniques, and 
connotative language. These are areas which need to be stressed, as in the ‗real-life‘ situation, the ability to 
penetrate the meaning of the written or spoken word is vital. Candidates with a weakness in responding to 
this kind of passage also find the Summary question very challenging. The mean on this question was 11 
out of 30 marks. 
Question 2 
The selection for this question was a brief extract from a novel by Rosa Guy. The questions set followed the 
specific objectives of Understanding (c). This aspect of the syllabus is detailed on page 3 of the syllabus, 
with explanations and examples starting on page 12 (Notes and suggested activities). Questions asked for 
supporting quotations, recognition of atmosphere, inference to be drawn from a sequence of behaviours, and 
evidence. This question was poorly answered. Candidates scored marks on questions where the answers 
were obvious (Questions (a) and (g)). Questions that required an interpretation and the recognition of 
writer‘s intent posed difficulties. Students should be encouraged to satisfy the requirements of questions —
for example, ―quote the sentence…‖ saw responses which quoted a few words. 
Question 3 
The content of this extract dealt with retirement savings: the relevance of financial literacy and the 
instituting of plans. This information was also within the experience and interest of the candidates. It lent 
itself well to factual questions, but also included questions requiring higher order skills — deduction and 
inferencing. The performance on this question was significantly better than on Question 2. Here again, 
questions that required candidates to draw inferences were challenging: for example, (f) required candidates 
to deduce the point that was being made; (h) tested candidates‘ understanding of the message in the last 
sentence, and to find the sentence near the start which gave the opposite view. Candidates experienced 
difficulty in providing precise answers. Many candidates showed an inability to differentiate between 
contextual meanings and literal meanings, treating both in the same ways, as in the case of ‗roadblocks‘ in 
Question (e). As in Question 2, there is the tendency by many candidates to cite several sentences to answer 
a question when a word or phrase is required. In Question (g), for example, many candidates gave 
unnecessary or contradictory information. The mean on this question was 8 out of 15 marks. 
- 4 -
Section C: Story Writing 
Of the three questions in this section, most candidates attempted Question 5. Question 6 was the least 
popular choice. Some excellent responses were generated from all topics. However, most responses were 
quite mundane. The use of Standard English still proves to be a challenge for too many candidates, with 
obvious interference from the creoles and dialects used in the region. Many stories were poor in using the 
elements of story writing. Students must be advised that use of the stimulus is a requirement. They must 
also be encouraged to take careful note of the rubric. 
Question 4 
This question used a picture of a young man, sitting under a tree, with a laptop computer on his lap as a 
stimulus. Around him is an array of books, some of them being study texts for CXC. Candidates seemed 
generally comfortable with the picture stimulus, but it did not give rise to any out-of-the-ordinary responses. 
Story lines tended to be similar and generally predictable. Unfortunately, some candidates failed to carry 
out the designated task and instead produced essays on ideas like the value of computers/technology in 
education. For candidates who have not learnt to discriminate among the different genres, the picture still 
proved to be a problem. The mean on this question was 13 out of 35 marks. 
Question 5 
Question 5 used as stimulus, the idea of a storm and the urgent need to warn people who were seen as being 
special. Very good responses came from candidates who used ‗storm‘ metaphorically. This approach 
allowed creativity and freshness. While most candidates attempted this question, it proved challenging for 
the following reasons: many candidates seemed confused by the tense and first person narration of the 
stimulus. These could not transition smoothly into their stories, so the beginning was used almost as a topic. 
There were many instances of confusion created by changes in point of view. Too often, there was little 
connection between the beginning and the content of the story. The mean on this question was 14 out of 35 
marks. 
Question 6 
Descriptive writing is a challenge for a large number of candidates. Most often, too few descriptive details 
are employed and too many responses are mainly narrative with some description. Candidates should be 
encouraged to help the audience to ‗see‘ the situation through the details they give. Most candidates who 
attempted this question still needed the framework of a narrative in which the description was incorporated. 
This is an acceptable approach to the question, since writing ‗pure‘ description can be quite challenging. 
Problems arose when candidates simply told stories with no attempt to describe. Yet, there were a few 
candidates who demonstrated competent descriptive writing techniques and produced interesting and lively 
writing, as the question ―was it real or science fiction?‖ triggered a wide variety of ideas. 
Section D: Argument 
Questions 7 and 8
The topics were well within the knowledge of candidates, and some very good work emerged. Nevertheless, 
as has been seen in the past, too many responses lacked adequate and well reasoned arguments/points and 
the requisite and appropriate argumentative devices to convince or persuade their audience. Question 8 was
the more popular, but better responses were written to Question 7. 
Question 7 required candidates to write an essay supporting the views of either of the following speakers: 
 
Speaker A: The government should cut subjects like Music and Visual Arts from the curriculum to save 
money in these hard economic times. 
Speaker B: No way! I think the government should find other ways to solve economic problems! 
- 5 -
In general, candidates tended to go off-track in Question 7. The more competent candidates made the link 
between solving the economic crisis without removing the subjects from the curriculum. Many candidates 
completely disregarded the economic factor and dealt only with the value of the Arts in education. 
These answers were reasonably good. Weaker essays dealt with education generally, or with what 
governments should do generally. The mean on this question was 14 out of 35 marks. 
Question 8 required a strong argument supporting or opposing the moot — ―Education is the only avenue 
for success in today‘s world‖. There was much rambling and narration of anecdotes, rather than a focus on 
arguing the point. More careful reading and attention to the thrust of the topic ―Education is the only 
avenue…‖ was needed. The mean on this question was 13 out of 35 marks. 
Recommendations for Teachers
 The quality of answers in Argument suggests that time management is an issue for many candidates. 
The main evidence of this is the extended length of answers for Section C, followed by short, 
unplanned and therefore poor quality arguments. Students would benefit from some coaching in how 
to manage their time.
 
 The problem in Section C is partly caused by unawareness of the elements of short story, and of 
effective ways to use the strategies that will develop the stories. Students need experience in editing to 
get rid of details which do not help the story. For example, students will give a long list of friends 
who attended a party when those friends have nothing to do with the outcome; or they will spend time 
describing a morning when they need to focus on the night the event took place. 
 The points following have been made before, but bear repeating in this report since they persist. 
 It is clear that large numbers of students across the Caribbean have not mastered the use of Standard 
English. There continues to be interference from dialects and patois used throughout the region; to 
these have been added the slangs originating from dancehall music and the North American ghettos 
and the abbreviations familiar to users of the messaging media of modern technology. For students 
who almost abhor reading, some methods must be found to encourage correct use of the language. 
 Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when summarizing 
and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their responses into a coherent 
whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to introduce these words into the active vocabulary 
of students. Practice in construction shifts and equivalent sentences would be useful. 
 The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both require 
thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. 
 Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words and sentences 
work in the language is important. 
 Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through exposure — if necessary, in class 
– to the reading of good literature. This includes focusing their attention to paragraphing, grammar, 
spelling, diction and other conventions of writing. 
 Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story writing and 
descriptive writing. 
 Greater use should be made of literature to teach writing — immersion into how stories work. 
 Strategies should be engaged to provide individual help to students so that individual needs can be 
addressed. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2013
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Overall, performance was moderate. There was a marked absence of superior scripts at one end, and also 
only a few incompetent scripts at the other. There was noticeable improvement in the Comprehension 
profile, but the Expression profile remained only fair, with only two per cent of candidates scoring 
Grade I on this profile. Candidates are encouraged to do more critical reading and discussion. As 
suggested last year, opportunities for more in-class reading and discussion should be created and geared 
to studying how writers say things and why. Such activities, through the use of a good model, provide 
candidates with an opportunity to widen their experiences. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple-Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. Approximately 80 per cent of the candidates received Grades 
I–III. Good performance was evidenced on Questions 1–20 which assessed grammar and mechanics of 
writing. Performance on the questions set on the literary passages was markedly better than on those set 
on the expository and persuasive texts. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
This section requires candidates to understand a piece of writing and to reproduce its meaning concisely 
and clearly. Competent performance demonstrates both these abilities. Weak scripts usually indicate 
major problems with understanding of the passage, and with ability to express meaning in the candidate’s 
own words (synthesis). Too many candidates try to get by with lifting chunks of text, ‘cutting and 
pasting’ them together, and adding an occasional word or phrase. The latter is a poor attempt to hide the 
fact that they are reproducing the words of the passage. We advise that teaching should concentrate on 
helping students to grasp and reproduce meaning. Learning activities should include: 
 exercises in equivalent sentences — this can be extended beyond one sentence to a paragraph. 
 practice in comprehension that involves interpretation of meaning (not just rewording) executed 
both orally and in writing. 
The following is extracted from the January 2012 report and repeated here because it is crucial: 
Summary teaching involves two major processes: information gathering (reading, 
identifying, choosing and interpreting what is relevant) and information giving 
(synthesizing, organizing and writing). Teaching must move beyond 'identifying points' to 
include in summary to understanding how the text is written. Focusing on text 
organizational patterns such as cause and effect, problem and solution, before and after 
and similar developmental strategies, can lead students to greater comprehension and 
synthesis of information before they begin to write. 
3 
Question 1 
This summary question is awarded total marks of 30, evenly distributed under three headings: 
 Understanding (Content) 
 Organization 
 Expression 
Answers suggested that the text was well understood. The contents dealt with the appearance or reality of 
physical fitness. It noted that one could be deceived into seeing muscular structure as fitness, when in 
reality, many muscular persons were using anabolic steroids. These persons had the benefit of looks, but 
the passage told of the dangers of steroid use, and challenged persons to be sensible in their choices. 
In the area of Understanding, students continue to score well, but there are persistent problems with 
Expression and Organization. The language of the text (apart from the permitted use of technical 
expressions) is, most often, lifted, so that candidates score low marks. It seems to be the norm to ignore
the instruction use your own words as far as possible. Candidates still continue to ignore the prescribed 
length for the summary, despite repeated warnings that marks will be lost, although answers showed some 
improvement. The need to go over the limit suggests that candidates are not as capable as they might be, 
in organizing their thoughts, so they can expect a lower mark under Organization. Most candidates 
appear to have been encouraged to use the order of ideas given in the text. Only a few, usually those in 
the superior range, show enough understanding to group statements according to relationship, and so 
produce succinct and accurate summaries. 
Satisfactory answers to this question 
 recognized the deception of appearing fit 
 recognized the willingness to take shortcuts to appear fit 
 pointed out the dangers: physical, psychological and social 
 cautioned those who would like to be fit to make intelligent choices. 
If candidates are to better develop their skills, they need: 
 extensive practice in organizing their answers, using transition words to help themselves and the
reader with understanding 
 to practise vocabulary exercises which help them to use simple, correct language 
 reminders that reusing the words of the passage entirely (whether in its entirety, selected chunks or 
by joining phrases from all over) attracts no marks — as they would not have presented any language 
of their own for assessment
 engagement in more close-reading exercises, paying attention to recognizing tone/attitude and the 
writer's intention 
 to engage in exercises in which analysing the internal structure of passages is emphasized 
 instruction in how paragraph cohesion is achieved, and in the use of appropriate transitional and 
connective expressions. 
4 
Section B: Understanding 
Question 2 
This question, which is worth 15 marks, was a poem. Candidates responded fairly well to the questions 
set on the poem. This is a departure from what is generally experienced when a poem is presented. The 
individual parts of the question that proved challenging or problematic for Question 2 were (d), (e) and 
(f). 
Part (d) required an understanding of language use – purpose and style. Part (e) asked for reaction, and 
candidates failed to distinguish between feeling and action/reaction. 
In Part (f) both expressions that represented contrast were needed to demonstrate that contrast, and many 
candidates were not able to indicate both. 
Question 3 
This question was an expository piece discussing treatment of and reaction to global warming. Given that 
the passage dealt with an issue which should be familiar to candidates, the responses were disappointing. 
The average mark out of 15 was 5. Many candidates could not respond appropriately to the expressions: 
political football and fiddled with. The strong suggestion is that although they can recognize metaphorical 
language from the diction (mechanically) they are not able to penetrate the meaning of the expression and 
its value in the text. Responses also suggested that candidates are unable to read questions correctly —
they ignore some words, misinterpret others, or simply do not understand what the question is asking. 
This indicates that apart from reading and discussing various texts, candidates need to be given practice in 
interpretation, and in recognizing key words that would reduce the chance of irrelevancies. 
The teaching of comprehension can be usefully combined with the teaching of summary writing as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning. Summary writing goes another step but 
understanding is the first stage. It is suggested that students be helped to be more focused on 
interpretation, more concerned with answering what is actually asked, rather than what is usually asked. 
As with Section A, much practice is advised in reading, listening, and reproducing meaning; in 
interpreting meaning at different levels; and in paying attention to accuracy. Developing sensitivity to 
how words and sentences work in the language is important, so that candidates rise above the level of 
seeing comprehension as guesswork. It is strongly recommended that teachers return to and apply 
Bloom’s (revised) Taxonomy, (for example), in developing questions. 
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
Following the now familiar pattern, there were three stimuli: Question 4, the picture; Question 5, the 
narrative prompt; Question 6, a descriptive essay responding to a specific setting. Question 5 was the 
most popular question, with twice as many candidates as those responding to Question 4, and three times 
as many as those choosing Question 6. 
Questions 4–5 
These questions are marked out of 35. The majority of the stories fell into range 3, with averages ranging
between 14 and 15 marks. 
5 
In Question 4, most candidates were able to use the stimulus satisfactorily, although the stories were not 
particularly strong. The stimulus to the narrative, Question 5, was also reasonably incorporated, although 
some candidates did little in constructing character, or meaningfully using the strategies of storytelling. 
Question 6 
In general, this question was not well done as candidates had a poor grasp of the requirements, and failed
to interpret the stimulus appropriately. Answers continue to be highly narrative. The majority of 
candidates do not grasp the need for descriptive details to create focus and are very weak in organizing 
movement of description. They demonstrate a lack of use of descriptive words and ability to create 
images, so visualization and interest are missing, and candidates resort to narrative. 
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
Question 7 
This question invited candidates to support or oppose the view that As long as government is paying for 
my education, it can tell me what to study. There were far-ranging interpretations, including: that the 
government could tell the candidate what specifically to study for the examination; the pros and cons of 
government-sponsored education; the right to freedom of choice. The question was the more popular 
choice, but the answers were generally poorly handled. 
Question 8 
This question asked candidates to express their views on the statement that A single Caribbean team 
should represent the region in all international sporting competitions. This statement lent itself to fewer 
interpretations. Examiners felt that candidates were unsure of the meaning of the term region. 
Recommendations 
 Planning: The rubrics which introduce each section of the examination paper invite candidates to 
plan their longer responses. This was often interpreted as ‘write the essay, then copy it’. This 
double-writing affects time negatively, and many answers showed the hurry to complete. Some 
candidates also failed to cross out the unwanted answer. The preparation for the examination 
should include the skill of outlining, so the candidate can make maximum use of the time.
 Language Use: The quality of language generally, but particularly in the questions which 
demand longer continuous answers (Questions 1, 4/5/6; 7/8) raises some concern: shifting tenses, 
lack of discrimination in past tenses, lack of subject and verb agreement, basic punctuation and 
spelling errors are all persistent problems. Very often, rereading reduces the number and type of
errors, and students should be taught how, and encouraged to reread critically. 
 Examiners advise that much more effort should be put into helping candidates to improve their 
stock of adjectives and adverbs, and to provide opportunities for studying and emulating good 
descriptive pieces. 
 Most candidates are exposed to the visual through television. This can be used constructively to 
help develop the skill of descriptive writing. Candidates may be invited to role-play, to be the 
camera or camera person. They should become familiar with the concepts of foreground, middle 
distance and background; with the techniques of panning and focusing; and helped to distinguish 
between concrete and abstract words and phrases. 
6 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have been prepared to write their argumentative 
essays along specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while 
some students do benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the 
risk that competent and even superior students will be forced into a mould which affects their 
expression and development negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and 
provide them with a variety of ways to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2013 
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
- 2 - 
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance overall this year was fair. Approximately 58 per cent of the candidates achieved Grades 
I to III. This was an increase over 2012 when the percentage of candidates who achieved this level 
was 47. Performance on the Expression profile continues to be only moderate with only four per cent 
of candidates achieved Grade I on this profile. Students must be engaged in the myriad of ways in 
which language is used. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was fairly good. The trend of good performance on the items assessing 
vocabulary, and grammar was again evident. Performance in comprehension questions based on 
literary, informative and persuasive passages was fair. Items which caused difficulty included those 
relating to recognizing and assessing the use of devices, recognizing mood, tone and style and 
distinguishing between the author’s attitude and attitudes of characters
Paper 02 – Free Responses 
SECTION A 
Question 1 
Analysis of this section has frequently appealed to teachers and students to pay more attention to it. 
The responses for July marking 2013 demonstrate some improvement, and suggest that the entreaties 
have been recognised.
- 3 - 
The passage to be summarised was an article entitled ‘Water’ adapted from Global Environment 
Outlook for Youth in the Caribbean – A Vision for Change! The passage highlighted the current 
situation in which the world is in imminent danger of water shortage, partly because water is taken for 
granted in some places while the supply is abused in others. The world does in fact does have 
sufficient water for all, but modern management measures must be employed to ensure continued 
world supply. The passage also points out the importance of water supply to economic prosperity, and 
indeed to the well being of human society.
This section was allotted 30 marks distributed evenly in 3 areas under Profiles 1 and 2. 
PROFILE 1 PROFILE 2
Content
(understanding) 
10 MARKS 
Organistion
10 MARKS 
Language 
10 MARKS 
Content 
 There was improvement with regard to meeting the word limit and attempting the question. 
 The vast majority of candidates understood well that the passage was about water supply. 
They also picked up on the inadequacy of current conservation strategies and the need to 
ensure that water would be available for future generations. Despite their understanding of 
these key issues, some candidates lost marks in Area 1 because they were unable to express 
said issues accurately and coherently with respect to the original passage. E.g. in the 
statement: 
“At the global scale there is enough water to provide water security for 
socioeconomic, technical and institutional aspect of water use” 
- 4 - 
Students seemed to have recognised and understood the point but repeated the words
“At the…security”, and then copied the last part: “for socioeconomic … water use” 
out of context because they did not grasp the correct relationship. 
The following are some of the distortions noted: 
 the scarcity of water was seen as a present reality but not as a future crisis, so in many cases 
there was no reference to the looming water crisis 
 water shortage was misinterpreted and referred to as water storage 
 ‘forecast’ (para 2) was aligned to weather reports. 
 attempts to meet the word limit by using telegraphic language resulting in incoherent 
responses. 
Superior responses demonstrated excellence in reproducing the critical elements of the original 
passage in the candidate’s own words, most often in flawless or near flawless language. In a few 
instances responses indicated a superior understanding of content but some weakness in language. 
Responses assessed as suggesting or demonstrating incompetence included one or more of the 
following: 
 The introduction of extraneous material based on prior knowledge, both technical and casual. 
 Misinformation prompted by imperfect understanding of details. E.g. “While a political 
commitment is not simple, we must demand it.” This was entirely out of context and based 
on two sentences in the original: “The best initiatives are those that make a political 
commitment to consider water as an integral part of sustainable human development...”; 
“There is no quick fix or simple solution when it comes to safeguarding and managing a 
resource that is in as much demand as water.”  Incomplete ideas. 
- 5 - 
Organization 
The passages used for examination purposes are paragraphed. They follow the principles of 
paragraphing: a topic sentence and a number of supporting sentences. In writing summary, students 
are taught to recognise the topic sentence in each paragraph, and to use the meanings generated from 
them to create a generalized piece of writing. This suggests that the length of the piece they submit 
will not allow the use of paragraphs. This is a concept grasped and demonstrated by the superior 
student, and the understanding of the generalization principle is important for all students if they are 
to improve their skills in summary. 
Superior responses were easily recognizable due to the smooth transition from one thought to the 
other and the demonstrated ability of the candidate to re-arrange the original passage into a coherent 
whole while maintaining its perspective, purpose, tone, as well as sense of audience without losing 
content. 
Responses at a low level of competence follow the paragraphing of the original slavishly. They do not 
recognise the relationship between points that do not follow each other in the original. They generally 
show a passive understanding of some sentences and phrases in the extract and reproduce these 
verbatim. Examples of this in the paper under review include: 
 At the global scale, there is enough water to provide “water security” for all...
 The scarcity of water is a very relative concept... 
 A basket of factors including socioeconomic, technical and institutional aspects of water 
use... 
 Sustainable human development...
 Inequitable distribution of water...
 Our managerial capacity has to be upgraded... 
Included below are the salient points of the passage, and one of the sample summaries used to 
standardize the marking. 
- 6 - 
 Water is vital to all aspects of life and human activity. It is often taken for granted and its 
value is overlooked. 
 Water scarcity means different things in different places but everywhere it relates to a 
country’s economic and social activities and to people’s attitudes to water.
 World shortage is not actual because there is really enough water for all, but the threat is 
caused by careless attitudes, outdated management of resources, and waste. The impact is 
that a very large portion of the world will face real scarcity by 2025. 
 Attention must be given to the problem in order to ensure that future generations have water 
and that the needs of the poor are addressed.
 The solution will come from a change in our attitude to water use, the appropriate valuing of 
water, and the employment of updated management strategies. 
Sample summary: 
People today seldom think of water shortage; however, it is predicted that by 2025 this could be a 
reality for billions. The crisis will not result from real water scarcity, but from poor management and 
attitudes. Addressing the problem means considering all factors related to water use. Water is 
critical to each country’s economic and cultural well being, and ideal practices must focus on 
sustainable human development and the reduction of poverty. If water is to be distributed equitably 
we have to recognise its value and the need to conserve for the future. The answer will not be found 
easily, and requires that management practices be updated to meet modern requirements. 
 (111 words) 
Advice to Teachers 
Judging from the relatively few instances of ‘no response’ to Section A, students are more willing to 
attempt summary writing. However, they continue to be hindered in their efforts by inadequate 
vocabulary which affects both comprehension and summary production. There is also low/no use of 
- 7 - 
connectives resulting in summaries that read more like lists of bulleted items than continuous prose. 
Generally speaking, however, there has been improvement in candidates’ ability to meet the demands 
of this section. Following are some suggestions to keep the improvement going: 
 Introduce summary writing early – some students need to start in the first year of secondary 
school, particularly if their reading levels are not up to required standard. 
 Constantly reinforce vocabulary and effective punctuation. 
 Give students practice in writing within a specified word limit. 
 Provide students with activities aimed at understanding and using appropriate connectives. 
 Provide students with activities aimed at mastering interpretation and construction shift. 
 Encourage students to use their own word; discourage lifting from original passages. 
SECTION B
In keeping with the specifications of the syllabus and the design of the Specimen Paper, poetry can be 
used on Paper 2, and in Paper 1. Analysis of the results in this year’s examinations indicated that the 
two stimuli used created a good balance.
Question 2 
In this section candidates were able to benefit from the allocation of marks for partial answers. The 
allocation of marks allowed candidates to score 1 point on questions with a full score of 2 marks. On 
the other hand, candidates lost marks when they failed to be specific as required, or put answers 
which required the examiner to select the correct response. 
- 8 - 
The poem “Carrion Crows” was within the candidates’ experience. They clearly understood what the 
poem was about. Candidates were aware that there were negative and positive aspects about the 
behavior of the crows themselves, but not all were able to make these distinctions between the crows' 
attitude, the poet's attitude, and the poet's craft. It was evident that a few candidates found Questions 
(d) and (g) challenging because they lacked the vocabulary to describe what they knew. These 
questions required understanding of the terms “effect” and “attitude”. On the other hand, the answers 
to (a) (b) and (c) which required explicitly stated information, were generally correct. Some 
candidates seemed unsure of what to identify specifically as alliteration and metaphor, and quoted the 
entire line in which the device was used: " And I have seen them perched on paling post" as opposed 
to "perched on paling post". 
Question 3 
There were a few “No Responses” for individual parts of this question, possibly because of poor time 
management, and also because questions demanded interpretation and deduction. Question (h), “what 
action concerning the environment would be recommended to the government of Socrato based on the 
information in the last paragraph”, was one such question. Most candidates listed recommendations 
that were based on what the passage stated as problems: for example some recommended that over 
fishing and excess road building should stop. The weaker candidates made recommendations about
environmental issues that the passage/paragraph did not address. The better candidates, it seems, were 
either in command of effective comprehension strategies, and were able to make recommendations 
with more far-reaching effects on the environment such as “Be careful about development which 
disturbs and destroys the natural environment”.
Advice to Teachers
 It is recommended that teachers pay closer attention to writer's techniques, attitudes and 
purpose, and to commenting on the effectiveness of devices used. 
- 9 - 
 Candidates still need practice in quoting relevant and specific phrases and identifying key 
words. 
 Candidates require more help in determining what specific questions ask, so that their 
responses may be specific. 
SECTION C
Question 4 
Although the story based on the picture is not usually very popular with candidates, this year it was 
the one which most candidates attempted. Perhaps this was because most candidates would have been 
familiar with the scenario, even if only vicariously. Perhaps because of this familiarity, many 
candidates did not seem to have worked very hard to produce interesting responses. Most were 
therefore simple, very similar, predictable narratives which lacked creativity. 
Question 5 
Of the two questions set for story-writing this proved the more challenging. Many candidates 
experienced difficulty incorporating the sentences into their answers. Skilled candidates responded to 
the stimulus in effective, interesting ways. This does not suggest that the question was too difficult: 
candidates writing this examination should be able to cope competently with a question like this. 
Unfortunately this stimulus was seen by many as an opportunity to produce television-styled violence 
instead of effective characterization and meaningful conflict. 
- 10 - 
Question 6
This question required a descriptive essay based on the stimulus “It was all done; all the groups were 
sure that nothing more could be added. Emotions were mixed as we quietly studied that large room. 
Describe the scenes and reactions you saw.”
Although more candidates have a clearer understanding of the requirements of a descriptive essay 
than previously, the number of responses remains in the minority. The problems persist: 
 Most candidates who attempted the question were unable to differentiate between a 
descriptive essay and a story. Even when there was description, it was bound to particular 
characters or locations in the narrative.
 There was again misinterpretation of the question so many responses were weak or irrelevant. 
Many candidates did not see or did not understand “It was all done;” or could not figure out 
how it was important to the response. 
There is concern about the significant amount of interference from local creoles/dialects on the 
Standard English of large numbers of candidates writing this exam. Examples of this interference 
were again seen in areas such as the non-marking of past tenses, weak spelling, and the use of 
pronouns which have no antecedents. 
Other problems with the mechanics of the language continue to be evident; for example; 
 punctuation, especially in run-on sentences - perhaps this problem is indicative of a more 
serious issue: lack of understanding of sentence structure. 
 non-use of paragraphs - many candidates write pages of the story in one long unbroken 
block. 
- 11 - 
Advice to Teachers
 There is a pressing need to deal with the issues of (1) relevance, (2) singularity of event, and 
to a lesser extent (3) point of view, so that candidates may better meet the requirements of 
length and focus in their stories. 
 Candidates are asked in this section to use Standard English to respond to a particular 
stimulus. Candidates need to be encouraged to be self critical where relevance is 
concerned. Weak candidates and those with a low level of competence tend to write 
pages of script before getting to the point of the response. The importance of ‘point of 
view’ and the need to control it must be emphasized so that clarity of the plot is 
maintained. 
SECTION D
Questions 7 & 8 
Overall, there were improvements in the use of language -grammar and mechanics in particular, in 
comparison to previous years. With regard to time management, this year it seems that more 
candidates answered the questions. There were fewer incidents of "No Response". Despite the 
shortcomings of some candidates who answered the questions in letter format or in the narrative form, 
it was clear that most candidates understood the concept of persuasive writing and used devices and 
transitions as needed. 
The questions to which candidates responded are below. 
Question 7 
“Government should offer free health care for everyone residing in a country, 
nationals and non-nationals alike.”
- 12 - 
Write an essay EITHER supporting OR opposing this view. 
Question 8 
“School principals should consult with the student body on ALL matters affecting the 
lives of the students.” 
Write an essay giving your views on this statement. 
Question 7 
 Some candidates misinterpreted the term ‘non-national’, and either ignored or did not 
understand the word 'residing' - which should have given them the hint as to what "non￾national ' meant. 
 Some candidates did not define the key terms from the chosen stimulus, while other had 
incorrect definitions. 
 Little or no supporting evidence was given for the perspectives being given in the essay. 
 Many students agreed that health care should be free but did not present clear arguments 
that demonstrated the benefits of such a venture. 
 A few candidates interpreted the word "country" to mean a rural area, rather than their 
home territory.
 Question 8 
 Many candidates misinterpreted the term "student body" to mean the Students' Council or the 
students' physical bodies. 
 The word "consult" created some ambiguity which resulted in various interpretations . 
Common among these interpretations, was the notion that "consult" referred to the principal's 
role as counselor. 
 The expression ‘all matters' was not handled effectively. 
- 13 - 
 The points posited by candidates were generally not well developed. There was an absence of 
supporting details or appropriate rhetorical devices. Some candidates merely listed the issues 
without any attempt to argue how consultation would address these issues. 
 Most of the issues identified were home related such as divorce, violence and abuse. 
Advice to Teachers
 There continues to be significant concern that too many candidates have sentence 
construction challenges: sentence splices; hanging sentences; fragments; and run-on 
sentences. Many used the vernacular of their countries. 
 Instruction may benefit from the use of more class discussions in which students are 
challenge to say WHY they hold their perspectives. 
 Opportunity to critique written arguments from well-known persons or good Internet sources 
should go some way in encouraging better understanding and production of argument. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
PROFILE CUT-OFFS
[WEIGHTED]
JANUARY 2013 
PROFILE 01 
(MAX = 76) 
GRADES SCORE
PROFILE 02 
(MAX = 114) 
GRADES SCORE
I 52 (68%) I 71 (65%) 
II 44 (58%) II 60 (53%) 
III 35 (46%) III 51 (45%) 
IV 27(36%) IV 39 (34%) 
V 13 (17%) V 17 (15%) 
VI <13 VI <17 
COMPOSITE CUT-OFFS
[WEIGHTED]
GRADES COMPOSITE CUT-OFF
I 123 (65%) 
II 104 (55%) 
III 86 (45%) 
IV 66 (35%) 
V 30 (16%)
VI <16 
2 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
QUESTION CUT-OFFS BY PROFILE 
PAPER 02
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
PROFILE 1 PROFILE 2
GRADES GRADES
I II III IV V VI I II III IV V VI
1. 7 6 5 4 2 <2 13 11 9 7 3 <3
2. 11 9 7 6 3 <3 NOT APPLICABLE
3. 11 9 7 6 3 <3 NOT APPLICABLE
4. 
NOT APPLICABLE
22 18 15 12 5 <5
5. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
6. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
7. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
8. 22 18 15 12 5 <5
PAPER CUT-OFFS
[RAW] 
PAPER 01 
(60) 
GRADES SCORE
PAPER 02 
(130) 
GRADES SCORE
I 39 (65%) I 54 (41.5%) 
II 34 (56.6%) II 47 (36.1%) 
III 29 (48.3%) III 38 (29.2%) 
IV 23 (38.3%) IV 31 (23.84%) 
V 20 (33.3%) V 11 (8.4%) 
VI <20 VI <11 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
TABLE OF SPECIFICATIONS 
PAPER 01 – GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
Number Objective Cognitive Level Question 
Number Objective Cognitive Level 
1. UA Application 31. UC Comprehension
2. UA Application 32. UC Comprehension
3. UA Application 33. UC Comprehension
4. UA Application 34. UC Comprehension
5. UA Application 35. UC Comprehension
6. UA Application 36. UC Comprehension
7. UA Application 37. UC Comprehension
8. UA Application 38. UC Comprehension
9. UA Application 39. UC Comprehension
10. UA Application 40. UD Comprehension
11. UA Application 41. UD Comprehension
12. UA Application 42. UD Comprehension
13. UA Application 43. UD Comprehension
14. UA Application 44. UD Comprehension
15. UA Application 45. UD Comprehension
16. UA Application 46. UB Comprehension
17. UA Application 47. UB Comprehension
18. UA Application 48. UB Comprehension
19. UA Application 49. UB Comprehension
20. UA Application 50. UB Comprehension
21. UC Comprehension 51. UB Comprehension
22. UC Comprehension 52. UB Comprehension
23. UC Comprehension 53. UB Comprehension
24. UC Comprehension 54. UB Comprehension
25. UC Comprehension 55. UD Comprehension
26. UC Comprehension 56. UD Comprehension
27. UC Comprehension 57. UD Comprehension
28. UC Comprehension 58. UD Comprehension
29. UC Comprehension 59. UD Comprehension
30. UC Comprehension 60. UD Comprehension
60 questions – 1 mark each 
Profile assessed – Understanding 
Total UA – 20
Total UB – 9 
Total UC – 19
Total UD – 12
Total 
40 – Comprehension 
20 – Application 
2 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
HEADQUARTERS
ENGLISH A 
TABLE OF SPECIFICATIONS 
PAPER 02 – GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
JANUARY 2013 
Question 
Number Profile and Marks Awarded Syllabus 
Objective Cognitive Level 
1. Understanding – 10 marks 
Expression – 20 marks 
UB Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
2. (a) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
 (b) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
 (c) Understanding – 1 mark UC Application 
(d) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension
(e) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension
(f) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
(g) Understanding – 2 marks UC Application 
 (h) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
(i) Understanding – 2 marks UC Comprehension 
3. (a) Understanding – 1 mark UB Comprehension
(b) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension
 (c) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (d) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (e) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
(f) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
(g) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
 (h) Understanding – 2 marks UB Comprehension 
4. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis
5. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
6. Expression – 35 marks UC Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
7. Expression – 35 marks UD Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
8. Expression – 35 marks UD Comprehension/Application/Synthesis 
Understanding – 40 marks
Expression 195 marks (Total expression marks candidates can achieve on this paper is 90) 
Cognitive Levels 
Comprehension – 15 
Application – 2 
Comprehension/Application/Synthesis – 5 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE
 EXAMINATION 
JANUARY 2014 
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance in January 2014 compared favourably with the results in earlier years. As has come to be 
the norm, there was neither an outstanding improvement, nor significant decline, but the results continued 
to be skewed towards the lower grades. The incidence of candidates being wholly unprepared for the 
examination was again relatively small, yet most responses tended to fall into the category of being 
‘adequate’. Teachers are urged to make use of the various guidelines and aids to learning being 
developed by the Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC), to help students be more comfortable with 
both language and literature, and to improve language through the skills acquired in studying literature. 
One resource is the syllabus document, in which there is a large section which helps with interpreting the 
syllabus objectives and requirements, and suggests a variety of activities which can help in developing the 
appropriate skills. 
Taken as a whole, there is some improvement in the performance, but individual questions as expected, 
show fluctuations in quality. Candidates seem to lack strategies to help them use their time and skills to 
the best advantage under examination conditions. At the start of each question there are instructions and 
cautions to which examination candidates need to be encouraged to give thoughtful and careful attention. 
The following advice was among several pieces offered to instructors in 2009, and is still very relevant 
today: 
Students should come to the examination with a well-rehearsed procedure for tackling 
each question…they should have deeply ingrained in them the procedure for identifying 
the topic, jotting down points, doing a rough copy and producing a fair copy. This is 
especially important in writing a summary, in doing a description, in writing a story and 
in producing a cogent argument. Teachers should advise each student, based on the 
student’s ability and speed, about the best way to move from a rough copy to a fair copy 
under examination conditions. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice 
Performance on Paper 01 was good. Approximately 84 per cent of candidates received Grades I–III. 
Exercises on word choice, sentence completion and equivalent sentences were well done. The area in 
which greatest weakness was evident was usage where candidates experienced difficulty recognizing 
sentences which contained clichés, misused metaphors or redundancies, and sentences that were incorrect 
grammatically. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
This section of the paper — summary — tests skills which people generally use daily in summing up 
responses to life’s experiences. It is an academic activity therefore which has practical value, and 
3 
students might respond better to the challenges of summary if teachers remember to teach for the transfer 
of skills. Discussions with persons approaching tertiary level academic pursuits, and with many in the 
work sector, indicate that there is a strong tendency to confuse the strategies — paraphrasing, quoting and 
summarizing. 
There are also observations that while secondary level students are required to research and produce 
scholarly evidence, the manner of presentation accepted is very often sheer plagiarism. The plagiarized 
presentation delivers the impression that the student is low in understanding. For this reason teachers are 
encouraged to explore with the students the Skills and Abilities to be Assessed as presented in the 
syllabus document: Understanding (a) and (b) (i) to (x), and (d) (i) and (ii); Expression (a) and (b). 
Question 1 
Among the comments which examiners and assistant examiners made on the passage and task were: 
 The instructions given to the question clearly indicated what was expected of candidates. 
 Candidates seemed able to relate well to the passage as the issues addressed were within their 
experience. 
 The level of vocabulary in the passage was not unduly challenging. 
 The length was suitable to the time frame allowed. 
Comments made on the candidates’ responses included the following:
Strengths 
 General understanding of the passage 
 The ability to identify key points 
 Organization of material 
Weaknesses 
 Using transitional devices 
 Creating accuracy because of some inability to interpret or express relationships 
 Far too much lifting of phrases and sentences rather than using their own words 
 General expression 
The points expected in the summary were: 
 The 1990s widespread encouragement of lower income persons to enter university has led to 
disappointment and frustration. 
 Governments cannot maintain the costs. 
 Students entering university have unrealistic hopes and expectations from the degrees. 
 Students entering university require remedial help. 
 Falling standards have resulted from lower level entry requirements. 
 When universities seek higher fees students are frustrated. 
4 
 There are too many graduates in areas which are not vital to national development. 
 Jobs formerly held by those without degrees are now claimed by the high numbers of graduates, 
thus causing employment and job dislocation. 
Section B: Understanding 
Questions 2 and 3 
The passages in this section followed the established pattern: one literary piece, one expository piece. 
Examiners were happy with the length and degree of complexity/simplicity in both passages. The first 
passage was an extract from God Bless the Child, published in Essence, September 2006. The issue dealt 
with homelessness and the impact on children. 
The examiners’ overall assessment was that most candidates attempted all questions, and interpreted them 
satisfactorily. The major problems came from questions that required skills of literary analysis. Such 
questions included: 
 Why does the writer use the expression…?
 List two ways in which the family was affected by the mother’s decision.
 What is the narrator’s attitude to the situation described in the passage? 
The expository passage was less well handled. Its subject was Yoga in the Caribbean. Though the 
language was well within their reach, it was observed that some candidates appeared to be unfamiliar with 
the term Yoga. Most of the candidates’ difficulties arose from inadequate vocabulary, and a weak 
response to the written expression, that is, weakness in analysing the written word. 
The questions offering most challenges were (b) and (c), which asked for recognition of contrast; (e), in 
which the word “complementary” appeared to be unfamiliar (it was frequently interpreted as meaning 
‘free’); and (f), which required an appreciation of connotation and denotation, indicating that there is still 
some inability to distinguish between literal and figurative language. 
Teachers and students are again referred to the Skills and Abilities to be Assessed section of the syllabus 
and encouraged to pay attention to Understanding (c) — grasp insights from reading literature. 
Other persistent problems are the failure to use quotation marks when asked to quote, and the use of full 
sentences when asked for phrases. This becomes a problem when the sentence used contains ideas that 
are opposed to the answer required. 
5 
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
For the January examination, candidates were given more details in the instruction to encourage them to 
be conscious of their task. This seems generally to have brought good results. Problems continue, 
however, in the ability to distinguish between narrative and description. 
Question 4 
It was noted that candidates were better able to respond to the picture stimulus. Though there were 
responses which were expository, these were fewer — an improvement over the past. 
Question 5 
For the most part, responses were satisfactory. Candidates in instances were able to use the stimulus to 
develop interesting story lines and characters. Stories were generally effectively organized. The areas of 
weakness were in most instances weak language structure and mechanics. 
Question 6 
This question continues to produce answers that make heavy use of narration rather than description, but 
there has been improvement in the number and quality of the descriptions. 
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
Question 7 
As with Section C, examiners felt that the expanded rubric worked to the candidates’ advantage. Several 
approaches to the dialogue seemed possible, but candidates successfully responded to a selection of 
aspects given in the stimulus. Valid points were made and correct arguments and strategies employed. 
Question 8 
This was the more popular choice of stimulus. Again, there was scope for several interpretations or 
reactions, as there was some scope for addressing some social issues. Responses suggested that 
candidates identified with the topic. 
Weaker scripts demonstrated: 
 Inability to develop points rationally 
 Poor organization 
 Limited vocabulary 
 Weak sentence structure 
 Misuse/overuse of the rhetorical question 
 Inadequate linking of points/paragraphs 
6 
Assistance with this part of the syllabus is found in the document, under the heading Expression. The 
section with suggested activities, in particular Expression (c) and (d) contains many suggestions. 
Recommendations 
 Planning: The rubrics which introduce each section of the examination paper invite candidates to 
plan their longer responses. This was often interpreted as ‘write the essay, then copy it’. This 
double-writing affects time negatively, and many answers showed the hurry to complete. Some 
candidates also failed to cross out the unwanted answer. The preparation for the examination 
should include the skill of outlining, so the candidate can make maximum use of the time.
 Language Use: The quality of language generally, but particularly in the questions which 
demand longer continuous answers (Questions 1, 4/5/6; 7/8) raises some concern: shifting tenses, 
lack of discrimination in past tenses, lack of subject and verb agreement, basic punctuation and 
spelling errors are all persistent problems. Very often, rereading reduces the number and type of 
errors, and students should be taught how, and encouraged to reread critically. 
 Examiners advise that much more effort should be put into helping candidates to improve their 
stock of adjectives and adverbs, and to providing opportunities for studying and emulating good 
descriptive pieces. 
 Most candidates are exposed to the visual through television. This can be used constructively to 
help develop the skill of descriptive writing. Candidates may be invited to role-play, to be the 
camera or camera person. They should become familiar with the concepts of foreground, middle 
distance and background; with the techniques of panning and focusing; and helped to distinguish 
between concrete and abstract words and phrases. 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have been prepared to write their argumentative 
essays along specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while 
some students do benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the 
risk that competent and even superior students will be forced into a mould which affects their 
expression and development negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and 
provide them with a variety of ways to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
 EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2014 
ENGLISH A 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St. Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
– 2 –
GENERAL COMMENTS 
Performance in English A remained moderate in the May/June 2014 examination sitting. Fifty-nine per cent 
of the candidates achieved Grades I to III, consistent with overall performance in May/June 2013 when 58 
per cent of the candidates achieved similar grades. There was a moderate improvement in performance on 
Paper 01, which assesses Profile 1, Understanding, and a small improvement on Paper 02 which also 
assesses Understanding but focuses primarily on Profile 2, Expression. 
However, performance on Paper 02 continues to be below the expected standard. The questions in the three 
sections on this paper generally elicited only moderate levels of performance. General weakness was 
observed in many candidates’ inability to organize ideas and to use grammatical English in expressing these 
ideas. 
The instructions to Sections A, B, and C have been expanded in order to help the candidates maximize 
responses and scoring opportunities. There is some evidence that the candidates’ attention has been drawn 
to this feature, but more encouragement is necessary to ensure greater compliance with these instructions. 
Too many candidates lapsed into the vernacular in answering Questions 2 and 3, and in responses to Section 
C.
Apart from the grammar, vocabulary and expression issues, poor handwriting and spelling stand in the way 
of obtaining the best marks. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Multiple-Choice 
Generally performance on Paper 01 was good, with approximately 82 per cent of candidates achieving the 
three top grades. The areas of particularly weak performance on this paper were the questions set on the 
expository extract. 
Paper 02 – Free Response 
Section A: Writing Reports and Summaries 
Question 1 
Candidates were instructed to read an article about the moon and its perceived effects on various aspects of 
life and activity on Earth, and then write a summary not exceeding 120 words. While the article captured 
the attention through a popular connection between the moon and insanity, that was not its focus. The 
article established through examples, that some ideas about the moon’s influence leaned towards the 
scientific, others towards popular folk tales and beliefs, and that research and investigation continue. 
Candidates’ responses were generally in the moderate to lower levels of competence. While many were able 
to recognize and express the moon’s importance to life, its suspected link to insanity and other negative 
behaviours, many were deceived by their own knowledge of the myths, folklore and old wives’ tales which 
are associated with the moon and focused incorrectly on these areas. Answers strongly suggested weakness 
in understanding the passage, and an inability to analyse the ideas expressed in it. This meant that such 
candidates were, in turn, unable to express those ideas cogently and in their own words. Answers showed 
significant weakness in making appropriate links between ideas, resulting in inappropriate strategies, 
ranging from repetition and/or extensive ‘lifting’, to the extreme of simply copying the passage until the 
word limit had been reached. 
– 3 –
A major hindrance to successful summary is lack of vocabulary, and poor expression. The CXC English A 
syllabus strongly suggests and seeks to foster a working relationship between literature and language. This 
gives students the benefit of experiencing, first hand, language in effective use. Use of good literature does 
not seek to force students to study literature per se, but exposes them to the quality of vocabulary and syntax 
that create good expression. 
The following italicized section is taken from the scheme used for marking the summary in each English A 
examination, and should be kept in mind as part of the teaching: 
Content 
The answer will be judged for its adequacy with respect to the following criteria within the set word limit. 
 Selection and accuracy of details (and their original linkages) and their completeness. 
 Clarity and faithfulness in respect of purpose/intent, and appropriateness of message and tone. 
 Attention to perspective/point-of-view and consistency of focus. 
Organisation of Content 
 Arrangement presented through sequencing, selection of cohesive ties, achievement of economy. 
 Arrangement of information in a coherent structure and sense of audience. 
Points to be noted in the answer: 
The moon is believed to have a variety of effects on all forms of life, but the extent to what is fact and what 
is fiction is still unclear. People are still inclined to mix scientific thought with myth. The facts are: 
 The moon has a strong gravitational pull on large masses of water on earth. 
 The human body is 70 per cent water, but it is too small to be affected by the moon. 
 The moon’s phases affect the reproductive cycles of humans and marine life. 
The beliefs are: 
 Madness, arson and violent crimes increase with the full moon. 
 More babies are born with the full moon. 
There is a suggestion that human behaviours are affected by beliefs, and research shows some correlation 
between change of behaviour and the changes of the moon. 
Sample Summary: 
Sample 1 
Several aspects of our lives, and events on a planet, have long been associated with the moon and its phases. 
Some of these things are built on scientific fact, others on folk beliefs. Researchers have investigated some 
of the beliefs, but results are inconclusive. One accepted feature is that the moon affects reproduction 
among females and some sea creatures. There is the belief that our bodies which are 70% water, are 
affected by the moon, but since such effects are only shown on large bodies of water, the belief is 
questionable. The moon’s connection to madness is also questionable. One lecturer in psychology suggests 
that our beliefs shape our lives and that we change our behaviour according to the things we believe. (110 
words) 
– 4 –
Sample 2 
It has been long believed that the moon affect many forms of life in some way. Some effects have been 
accepted by scientists such as the moon’s influence on the movement of large bodies of water and the 
reproductive cycles of women and some types of shellfish. There is the belief that there is a correlation 
between the moon’s phases and negative changes in human brain activity and actions. Anecdotes 
suggesting a rise in the number of babies being born at a particular time of the month and an increase in 
violent crimes have been linked to the moon’s cycle. Although the results of research into these areas have 
been inconclusive, the moon continues to fascinate us. (119 words) 
Sample 3 
People have long been led by evidence or story, to believe that the moon influences our lives. For instance, 
scientists accept the moon’s influence on reproduction among marine life, and its effect on the human 
female’s menstrual cycle. It is also known that the moon’s gravity affects water on Earth, but that water 
must be in very large quantities, so effects on the human body are rejected. Some people link insanity, 
higher birth rate, and periodic peaks in violent crime with the full moon. Scientists are investigating 
because of the many stories of lunar effects, true or imagined generally there is some acceptance of a 
connection between the full moon and behaviour changes, but conclusions are still mixed. (118 words) 
Superior responses reproduced the critical elements of the original passage in the candidate’s own words, 
most often in flawless or near flawless language. In a few instances, responses indicated a superior 
understanding of content but some weakness in language. 
Responses assessed as suggesting or demonstrating incompetence included one or more of the following: 
 The introduction of extraneous material based on prior knowledge. 
 Misinformation prompted by inadequate understanding of details. 
 Incomplete ideas. 
 A listing of ideas with no recognition of the relationship between points. 
Recommendations for Teaching 
Comprehension skills (primarily) and summary writing skills need to be reinforced. Students should: 
 be exposed to a wide range of expository passages and be guided in analysing text structures and 
modes of development 
 receive more practice in expressing what they read in their own words 
 be given exercises using transitional words 
 be exposed to good summaries which they are encouraged to critically examine for content, 
technique and length 
 be encouraged to participate in oral exercises in recounting versus summarizing (using topical 
issues, events and popular shows) which will grasp their attention, stimulate understanding, and 
demonstrate the goals of summary 
 exposed to sessions of functional vocabulary 
As understanding and summary exercises done in the classroom demonstrate mastery, attention should then 
be given to completing tasks within a given time frame. Penalizing the use of the language of the passage 
will drive home the value of using one’s own words.
Teachers are also encouraged to make use of the Internet, and to encourage students themselves to explore 
this avenue. It will alert them to the value of the skill, and break the tedium of the classroom. What the 
students learn, they can themselves introduce or teach to their peers. Several URL’s will be evident through 
a Google search, many of them produced by teachers. 
– 5 –
Section B: Understanding 
Section B continues to offer the candidates two short pieces of writing for study and comprehension: one 
piece expository, the other literary. These questions assess candidates’ preparedness to interact with various 
kinds of writing in their adult life, including their ability to recognize fact and fiction, and to appreciate the 
wealth of meaning conveyed by good writing. It seems, however, that the students are not challenged during 
their preparation for the examination, to recognize the different kinds of writing; their purposes, audiences, 
and styles, and therefore to expect a difference in the kinds of questions attached to each type of writing. 
According to the syllabus, candidates are expected to consider and appreciate the various techniques used 
and their effects; to recognize and understand literal and figurative language; to be able to quote accurately; 
to know the differences between ‘phrase’, ‘sentence’, ‘word’ and ‘expression’; to find the direct statement 
and the inference. Unfortunately, the evidence is that most candidates are able only to respond adequately to 
the straightforward, information-gathering kind of question. 
Question 2 
This question consisted of an extract from Harvey River: Memoir of My Mother and Her Island. The term 
‘memoir’ should have alerted candidates that this is more artistic than factual. It makes use of figurative 
language from the first sentence, “Hard Life was an ill-mannered visitor …” and uses expressions like “oily￾mouthed feasts’, for instance. Individual sub-questions asked candidates to recognize the words and phrases 
which created particular meaning and many candidates did not demonstrate the ability to do so. Many also 
failed to respond well to questions which asked for purpose, effect, feeling, description of character, or 
recognition of irony. 
Question 3 
This question presented a discussion on the effects of fast food. The passage is written in a matter-of-fact 
style, provides definitions, offers evidence through statistics and cites authority and is more in keeping with 
the kind of passage that candidates seem to like. Candidates appeared to have understood the content, but 
had severe difficulty in expressing meaning. One of the problems noted was a carry-over from Section A: a 
question which enquires interpretation cannot be effectively answered by simply lifting a sentence and 
presenting it as the answer. Based on this particular passage, candidates were required to recognize attitude, 
explain phrases, identify intention, recognize implications and give reasons. All of these proved to be very 
challenging tasks. Very noticeable again was the problem caused by poor vocabulary and, it is strongly 
suspected, by lack of exposure to extended, high-quality writing on various topics. Challenging words in 
this extract included “epidemic” and “unnecessarily”.
Recommendations for Teaching 
 Make use of high-quality magazine articles which provide writing that is modern, and factual without 
being pedantic and ‘highbrow’.
 Teach students how to structure answers. For instance, when a question asks “What is the writer’s
purpose, the answer must include the infinitive: “To…” 
 Recognize that figurative language is not restricted to literary texts. 
 Use the CXC literature texts as part of the language instruction. 
 Find ways to introduce vocabulary exercises. For example, the Toastmasters Club has a practice of 
introducing, explaining, and encouraging correct use of a new word each meeting. This may be 
adopted as a daily classroom activity. 
– 6 –
Section C: Writing Stories and Descriptive Essays 
Question 4 
Again in this examination sitting, the story based on the picture was the one which most candidates 
attempted. Unlike last year, this year’s stories were the best done of the choices. Generally candidates 
managed to successfully incorporate the stimulus into their responses. Answers ranged from simple stories 
of a haunted house to some attempts at metaphor and personification. 
Question 5 
This was the second choice of the narratives, and was more challenging. Though the idea of music and a 
party attracted candidates’ attention, their answers were less successful and less imaginative. Answers were 
less sure as some candidates could not determine whether to focus on the mistake, or the hesitation. Only a 
few combined the two successfully. Many spent the time describing a situation leading up to the decision or 
mistake, and were ineffective in structuring satisfactory endings, often petering out into simple, predictable 
and anti-climactic outcomes. 
Question 6 
The stimulus given in this year’s paper read: “When the fishermen finally reached the shore, what greeted 
them was nothing that they could have described.” The focus of this stimulus was the shore. There is room 
in this stimulus for the candidate to spend some time describing what was experienced before reaching the 
shore, in order to emphasize the unimaginable nature of the actual beach, which must also be described
(i.e.: visual detail given). In fact, the wording made the beach scene the area of greater importance, but 
candidates did not seem to recognize this. In addition, what was seen (described) on the beach could have 
been negative or positive, as the candidate chose. The problem is that the candidates need to be taught how 
to analyse, then encouraged to use the analytical skills to interpret what is said or not said, required or
not required, in a stimulus; and through the analysis to find the focus. Otherwise they could (and did) 
misapply their time and energy. 
Among the problems noted this year were: 
 Low level of ability to differentiate between a descriptive essay and a story. In fact, the number and 
quality of responses to this option indicated a regression from the standard achieved in the past two 
years. 
 Fewer candidates showed an understanding of the requirements of a descriptive essay. They failed to 
see the accumulation of details in order to give a picture, and settled, instead, for vague 
generalizations. 
 The organization was weak, so that many candidates were unable to master the spatial aspect: moving 
left to right, top to bottom, panning, etc.) 
 Rather than say what could be seen, and involve the audience in seeing the details so they might react 
on a personal level, candidates told the audience what to feel (e.g.: … it was warm and sunny … 
instead of … people were dressed in as little as was allowed, short shorts, sleeveless shirts, old ladies 
carried umbrellas…) 
 Candidates were trapped in the concept of time and event (in the narrative ‘… and then, and then …”)
– 7 –
Recommendations for Teaching 
 Our students, born and raised in a visual age, may have reached a point where they no longer see 
what is around them. In addition, they are blasted almost continually with loud and demanding 
sound. There are many practical reasons for learning to ‘see’ and describe.
 This suggestion invites the teacher to conduct brief but enjoyable training sessions:
 Provide students with only the sounds, then ask them to supply the visual, first orally, then 
in writing. Use a radio play, or a song, for instance.
 Have students, working in small groups, blindfold each other and then experience 
something.
 Present students with jumbled details, then have them arrange the material logically, and 
account for their choices.
 A writer may make use of multiple strategies to develop a piece of writing, and students need (i) to 
recognize these techniques and (ii) to understand how to identify the piece according to the 
predominant purpose and style. For example, an argumentative essay may use some definition or 
narrative to help in making a point clear. Narratives very often use description, in order to establish 
‘setting’ in time and place. Students must be encouraged to see the differences when a piece of 
writing is dedicated to story, OR to description.
 Teachers are encouraged to use literature (the texts set for English B, for instance) to help students 
to recognize and create different kinds of writing.
Section D: Argumentative Writing 
The questions were appropriate for the age level of the candidates, and examiners generally thought they 
were apt choices as they allowed candidates the opportunity to express their reasoned views and arguments 
on topical issues, bearing in mind that candidates range from those of middle to upper high school age to 
those who are at the age of adult maturity. 
Question 7 
Responses to Question 7 suggested that it offered candidates a manageable challenge in terms of ideas for or 
against (i) the claim that homeless people are a nuisance, and (ii) that the homeless should be forced into 
government-provided housing. Candidates had many ideas, but the challenge lay in their ability or inability 
to: 
 recognize the aspects of the discussion 
 organize their thoughts effectively to cover all aspects of the discussion 
 organize their ideas for the best strategic impact (move from stronger to weaker or from weaker to 
stronger points) 
 link their ideas and achieve cohesion 
 muster syntax and vocabulary well enough to express themselves clearly. 
Less able candidates understood the concept of ‘nuisance’, but then devoted the entire essay to establishing 
that nuisance element, abruptly attaching the ‘forced into …housing’ as a conclusion. In many instances 
candidates failed to support their claims, and relied instead on repetition of opinions. 
Question 8 
Question 8 required that candidates recognize the nature and purpose of rules generally, and of school rules 
in particular. It also required that they have some understanding of freedom generally, and a consciousness 
of how personal freedom fits into the broader issue. The problem of inadequate vocabulary negatively 
– 8 –
affected understanding and responses to the prompt. Particular areas included the meanings of ‘violate’ and 
‘personal freedom’. Violate was often interpreted as ‘annoy’. Many candidates took the statement 
personally or very narrowly, and related incidents of personal affront or negative reactions by schoolmates, 
rather than explore the concept of violate. Most often the focus was on specific rules in specific schools. 
Recommendations for Teaching 
 In responding to arguments, whether in real life or in examination essays, it is necessary to address all 
aspects of the argument that are put forward; not answering a specific aspect suggests that the candidate 
has a problem with that specific aspect. In any case, answers to arguments in examination essays have 
to be comprehensive since marks are assigned to the different parts of a question. In other words, if the 
candidate omits part of a question, he/she automatically loses the marks assigned to it. 
 While this section of the paper often gives topics which are of immediate interest to teenagers, 
candidates also need to keep abreast of topics of regional as well as wider or international interests. 
 It was observed that some candidates seemed to have prepared to write their argumentative essay along 
specific lines with particular techniques. Experienced examiners caution that while some students do 
benefit from such a strategy, teachers should use it with caution, as there is the risk that competent and 
even superior candidates will be forced into a mould which affects their expression and development 
negatively. It is highly preferable to teach them how to reason, and provide them with a variety of ways 
to open, develop, and close their arguments. 
 Teachers need to continue to give repeated practice in logical development of argument, especially in 
the proper use of conjunctions and adverbs which express logical relations, as in cause and effect, 
contrast and concession. Words and phrases such as ‘however’, ‘although’, ‘consequently’, ‘by 
contrast’ and ‘accordingly’ should be mastered and used in full sentences rather than meaninglessly or in 
fragments, as they often are. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2015
ENGLISH A
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2015 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
GENERAL COMMENTS
Performance in English A in January 2015 was fair. This was reflected by an increase in the 
percentage of candidates achieving acceptable grades. Approximately 56 per cent of candidates 
achieved Grades I–III, an improvement on January 2014 when the percentage of candidates who 
achieved this level of performance was approximately 52 per cent. The percentage of candidates 
who achieved Grade I increased from approximately seven per cent in 2014 to eight per cent in 
2015. 
Improved performance was evidenced on Profile 2, Expression. While overall there was an 
improvement in the quality of responses on questions on Paper 02, candidates continue to 
experience difficulty on the Expression profile. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Multiple Choice
Performance on Paper 01 was very fair with a mean score of 57 per cent. Nineteen per cent of the 
candidates achieved Grade I on this paper while 80 per cent of candidates achieved acceptable 
grades, I–III. Candidates were generally able to recognize facts stated explicitly and to extract 
specific and implied information. Items based on word and sentence meaning were generally well 
done. Items requiring recognition of errors in usage, inappropriate grammar or vocabulary in 
sentences were also generally well done. In the comprehension items weakness was noted in some 
candidates’ ability to evaluate the effectiveness of language devices used and the appropriateness of 
different forms and structures used to achieve the author’s intention. This was especially evident in 
Items 21–30, which were based on a poem. Items 23–26 and 29 assessed candidates’ knowledge of 
metaphor, tone, mood and connotative meaning. Items 40–47 assessed candidates’ ability to obtain 
information accurately from informational text. Candidates were expected to understand the 
writer’s intention, make comparisons and sequence information.
Paper 02 – Free Response
Section A: Summary
Question 1
In Section A candidates are required to demonstrate the ability to understand the written text, 
organize information and express the ideas clearly. To reiterate the message of past reports, the 
material is usually drawn from informative discourse or exposition (essays, reports, scientific 
discussions, analyses) suitable to the secondary school age group. The skills of selection and 
concise expression are targeted and specific aims are detailed in the syllabus under Understanding 
(a) and (b) and Expression (a), (b), (c). Included in the syllabus is the following advice: Summaries 
require economy of language, the careful selection of the relevant main ideas, and the preservation 
of the intention of the original.
The passage selected for January 2015 instructed candidates to read an article entitled ‘Our History, 
Our Future’ and write a summary of it not exceeding 120 words. Candidates’ responses were 
generally below average. The mean on this question was 12 out of 30. Some candidates’ answers 
suggested that they understood that man’s past mistakes are being repeated and that these could be 
avoided but they copied the words/sentences which expressed such. The majority was unable to 
say how to avoid the mistakes without using the words from the passage. In fact, most candidates 
- 3 -
began and completed their summaries using the same vocabulary presented in the passage. Many 
candidates actually wrote ‘summaries’ with six paragraphs (the same number as the original). This 
method of summarizing (slavishly following the structure of the original) prevented them from 
making appropriate links between ideas and resulted in repetition/extensive ‘lifting’. Many 
candidates also rewrote the examples and the quotation with a few ending their summary with the 
latter. There were also instances where candidates simply copied the passage until the word limit 
had been reached.
Apart from the language weakness, candidates demonstrated weakness in selecting the crucial 
elements and were hampered by a lack of vocabulary. Other persistent problems come from the 
assumption that the first sentence in a paragraph must be the topic sentence.
The points which should have been included are:
 History is full of valuable information, not only about events and dates, but also about 
behaviours and the consequences of those behaviours.
 People usually learn about history but do not learn from it, so they make the same mistakes 
of earlier generations.
 In order to learn from history, the reader must go beyond superficial study, must analyse 
and so learn from the earlier mistakes and best practices.
 Good research skills applied to history can lead to the discovery of effective strategies to 
be used in business and social development.
 Since history records human and cultural attitudes and behaviours, individual and national 
expectations, societies’ strengths and weaknesses, a study of it shows how to avoid conflict 
in a variety of contexts.
Sample Summary 1
History provides considerable information about dates and events, but also stores knowledge and 
examples which we, as individuals and leaders, can use in our daily personal and business lives. 
To get the benefit from history, we need to approach it inquiringly and analytically. We are then 
able to recognize, understand and appreciate character, patterns of behaviour, cultural 
peculiarities, social conditions and needs and responses. We also have a chance to understand 
more of the interpersonal and intrapersonal factors relating to managing people, our businesses, 
and our lives. When we fail to study history appreciatively we miss the warnings, repeat the 
experiments and bad practices, and get the same disastrous results as our predecessors did.
114 words
Sample Summary 2
History books contain useful knowledge of events, situations and human interactions. If we really 
want to reap the benefits of this knowledge, we need to use an analytical approach to the study of 
history. We will find that it gives us blueprints and advice on how to alleviate a wide range of 
negative human activity. We can avoid global and personal conflicts while we improve our 
business practices and our social and cultural interaction, both locally and globally. In short, the 
application of history’s lessons can be of great benefit to man’s progress. Instead, we learn only the 
contents of history and continue to make the same mistakes our ancestors did, so that history 
repeats itself.
116 words
- 4 -
Sample Summary 3
History contains a wealth of information relating to dates and events. In addition, not only are 
examples of human behaviours and actions recorded, but also the results of such; yet man has the 
tendency to simply learn history without using the analytical approach to it that would enable him 
to learn from it. As a result, the patterns that history has created are often unnoticed. By failing to 
make use of the positive insights provided, the mistakes of previous generations are repeated. The 
application of the analytical approach produces guidance for human interaction. Through it we 
avoid cultural and social conflicts. The result should be an improvement in human relations in all 
spheres.
113 words
Recommendations
Comprehension skills need to be reinforced and students should
 be exposed to a wide range of expository passages and be guided in analysing text 
structures and modes of development
 receive more practice in expressing what they read in their own words
 be given exercises using transitional words
 be encouraged to complete classroom exercises within the specific timeframe and word 
limit. Students should also be penalized for ‘lifting’.
Notes and Suggested Activities (specifically pages 6 –12) of the syllabus, will help both teacher and 
student to identify and hone summary skills. Strong support is also given in the new Nelson 
Thorne’s CXC English A Study Guide.
Section B: Understanding
Questions 2 and 3
These questions are designed to test understanding, using two short passages, one literary and one 
expository. The skills tested are outlined in the syllabus under Understanding (a), (b) and (c) 
(pages 2–3). Each passage has a different focus: in the expository type of passage the objectives are 
outlined in (a) and (b); in the literary, the greater number of questions satisfy Understanding (c). 
The results for Question 2 strongly suggest that reading and analysing writing of a literary nature 
needs to be given more attention. Pages 12–14 of the syllabus should be invaluable. Where 
questions require information obvious in the text, candidates gain marks, but fail to read between 
the lines, understand inference, purpose, techniques, and connotative language. 
Question 2 
The performance of candidates on this comprehension question indicated a wide range of abilities 
in comprehension, with scores ranging from 1 to 15. The mean on the question was 7 out of 15. 
While many candidates were able to correctly quote the phrase required in Part (a) (ii), there was 
the tendency to quote the entire sentence given in line 5, clearly indicating that candidates have not 
mastered the skill of ‘quoting a phrase.’
The passage set was an extract from the (Caribbean) novel The Leopard by Victor Reid. It is a 
reflective piece in which, through the night, the protagonist experiences a rainstorm and compares 
its destructiveness with the behaviours of a woman. In contrast, as morning comes and the storm is 
ended, he uses the metaphor of a fun-filled golden ball rising and breaking over the land.
- 5 -
Many candidates were able to identify the impact of the storm on the environment as requested in 
Part (c) (i). They were also able to accurately identify the words or phrases which conveyed this 
idea.
From the response of candidates, the most challenging question was Part (d). For this question, 
candidates were required to identify the difference in mood between paragraphs 1 and 3. Many 
could not use the terminology expected: dreary/dull; bright/hopeful. In some cases, instead of 
identifying the mood of the paragraphs, candidates reverted to identifying the mood of the writer.
Part (e) required candidates to quote pieces of evidence that suggested different times of the day. 
Some candidates were able to accurately quote the evidence, but others experienced difficulty 
producing answers that focused on the same time of the day, for example, morning.
Another challenging question was Part (f) (ii) where candidates were asked to identify another 
phrase in the passage which conveyed the same idea as “beyond the limits of the land”. Many got 
this incorrect. In other cases the question was not even attempted, suggesting generally a 
discomfort with metaphorical language.
The performance of candidates on the question indicates the need for some level of integration: 
using literature in the language classroom. It is evident that when candidates are asked to identify 
terms that are all too familiar in literature classrooms, those without that experience perform 
poorly.
Question 3
This passage examined the advantages and disadvantages of the increasing use of information 
technology in industry and commerce. It also looked at the impact on social and community life. 
It argued that in spite of the benefits, people and communities are vital and efforts must be made to 
maintain the connections between people. While Parts (a) and (c) which assessed the ability to 
retrieve information explicitly stated were answered correctly by the majority of candidates, Parts
(b), (d) and (f) were not well done as many candidates did not seem to interpret these questions 
correctly. The term ‘remote access’ used in Part (b) did not seem to be understood by some 
candidates while the writer’s ‘attitude’ was also not deduced by many candidates in answering Part
(d). The ‘effect’ the writer wanted to achieve by using the word ‘yet’ in Part (e) was another 
question not well answered. Part (f) required an inference which was not made in many instances,
while Part (h) required candidates to draw a conclusion. The mean on this question was 8 out of 15.
Section C: Story Writing
Of the three questions in this section, most candidates attempted Question 5. Question 6 was the 
least popular. A few very good responses were generated from all topics, but most responses were 
quite mundane. The use of Standard English continues to be a challenge for too many candidates, 
with obvious interference from the dialects used in the region. Many stories were poor in using the 
elements of story writing. Candidates must be encouraged to take note of the rubric especially as it 
applies to the way the stimulus is to be used, and to the length of responses.
Question 4
This question used a picture of a clearly malnourished dog about to be captured by a group of ‘dog￾catchers’. The picture focused on the animal and the devices used to catch it. Only the legs and 
arms of the catchers were visible. The stimulus offered candidates an opportunity to fully display 
- 6 -
the elements of short story writing and many candidates did a fair job of developing a story line and 
some attempts at characterization were quite good. The stimulus was used to present stories from 
several perspectives, for example, the dog, the dog-catcher or an animal lover. In many instances 
the conflict situation was clearly developed and a resolution established. The language component, 
although quite good in instances, revealed many areas of concern. The mean on this question was 
12 out of 35.
Question 5
The stimulus for Question 5 introduced a male, sitting on a bus between two persons who said they 
were his parents, and feeling that ‘something just did not feel right’. The candidates could have 
chosen any age group for the protagonist. A story which included internal 
conflict/reflection/suspense, and even comedy, was possible. Responses ranged from demonstrating 
incompetence to suggesting superiority although there were very few at the upper level. Candidates 
used the stimulus to varying degrees of effectiveness with most responses falling in the ‘suggesting 
competence’ range. Some candidates seemed to have difficulty linking the second part of the 
stimulus ‘something just did not feel right’ with the first part ‘two persons who said they were his 
parents’. The mean on this question was 17 out of 35.
Question 6
Descriptive writing continues to be a challenge for a large number of candidates. Pieces which 
focus on narration with only incidental description still form a major part of the submissions.
Candidates should be encouraged to show the situation to the audience through the details they 
give. Much work needs to be done in helping students to use structure and sequence to produce a 
good description. Candidates may be further encouraged and motivated if they are helped to see 
that the ability to describe is a vital aspect of our lives, part of our mechanism for self-protection. 
Observation, attention to details, and logical movement are relevant skills to be developed. The 
mean on this question was 15 out of 35.
Section D: Argument
Candidates were comfortable with these topics, and some very good work emerged. Still too many 
responses lacked adequate and well-reasoned arguments/points and the requisite and appropriate 
argumentative devices to convince or persuade their audience. 
Question 7
This topic was within the range of candidates’ experience so they were able to generate clear points 
for their responses. They were able to elaborate on these points thus providing the needed support 
for the topic. In addition to presenting sound arguments, many candidates were able to 
acknowledge and refute the counterarguments in a logical and mature way. For example, 
candidates argued that some of the benefits of the school setting include developing conflict 
resolution skills and team building while at the same time enabling individuals to develop a sense 
of independence. These responses showed that there was some awareness of the genre of writing 
that they were asked to address.
Some candidates demonstrated the ability to organize an essay vis-à-vis introduction, body and 
conclusion. This was probably facilitated by the extra page provided in the candidate booklet. 
There was evidence of prewriting activity such as brainstorming, outlining and the use of cluster 
webs — approaches that facilitate essay writing.
- 7 -
Unfortunately, too many weak aspects of grammar and poor spelling were evident. Some 
weaknesses were subject and verb agreement, pronoun usage, past tenses and weak sentence 
structures. Strategies need to be developed to help students to value their dialects while 
appreciating the need to use the standard variety of English. The mean on this question was 16 out 
of 35.
Question 8 
This question required candidates to give their views on the statement “No matter how old you are, 
as long as you live with your parents or guardians, you should obey the rules they set in the home”.
The question required three areas to be addressed, age, living at home and rules. Many candidates 
failed to address all aspects of the topic and repeated the same points throughout. In instances, their 
writing lacked clarity. Weak responses ignored punctuation, lacked logical sequence and used 
transitional words and phrases inappropriately. The mean on this question was 15 out of 35.
Recommendations for Teachers
 The quality of answers in Argument suggests that time management is an issue for many 
students. Students would benefit from some coaching in how to manage their time. 
 Students need experience in (1) planning stories and (2) editing to get rid details which do 
not help the story. For example, students will give a long list of friends who attended a 
party when those friends have nothing to do with the outcome; or they will spend time 
describing a morning when they need to focus on the night the event took place. 
The points following have been made before, but bear repeating in this report since they persist. 
 It is clear that significant numbers of students have not mastered the use of Standard 
English. For students who almost abhor reading, some methods must be found to 
encourage correct use of the language. More frequent exercises in writing, including taking 
dictation (of short stories) will help provide greater comfort with standard English.  Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when 
summarizing and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their 
responses into a coherent whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to improve the 
active vocabulary of students. For the more competent students, practice in construction 
shifts and equivalent sentences would be useful. 
 The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning.
 Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and in attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words 
and sentences work in the language is important.
 Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through exposure — if 
necessary, in class — to the reading of good literature. This includes focusing their 
attention to paragraphing, grammar, spelling, diction and other conventions of writing.
 Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story
writing and descriptive writing. Television watching is still a favourite pastime and can be 
a teaching–learning tool.











 














  
 

    
 








 
 
 
 




 
          


  

















   
 

 


 


 

 

 

   
 


 




 























 

 


 

 

 


 






 


    




      

































 


 


 


 

 

 

 

 












 

 
 


 

 


 
 
 














 

 

 


 




 
 

 

 







 

 

 


 



 

 
 
 
 








 

 

 

 



 
 

 


 







 



  
 

 

 



 

  

 



 




 

 

 


 



 








01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
2
SECTION A
1. (a) The staffroom of a school / A school.
(1 mark)
 (b) Focus on the scene and end of the scene. 
(2 marks) 
2. One of:
 -- he is contemptuous (‘bloody clowns’, ‘semi-literate’, ‘tongue 
like a woman’)
 -- he is cynical (‘expect nothing, avoid disappointment’, ‘bound to 
go to heaven’)
 -- he is intolerant (says nothing good about anyone).
 (1 mark for identification of attitude)
 (2 marks for evidence)
(3 marks)
3. Chaplain’s character comes under suspicion OR the audience is 
alerted to pay attention to the character to assess whether Pat’s 
statements are true.
(2 marks)
4. Any two of:
 -- the stage directions ‘synchronise his smash with the first stroke 
of the cane offstage’
 -- Chaplain’s acknowledgement (‘Ah, the Head’)
 -- the sound of flogging
 -- the stage direction ‘as he goes over to the headmaster’s door’. 
(2 marks)
5. Dacres is determined to make a good impression on the students OR
he takes the Chaplain’s comment to heart OR he is a conscientious 
teacher. His smile at Mica could have been friendly or may have 
indicated a more intimate interest.
 (an answer that addresses both stage directions – 
‘collects his things’ and ‘smiles at Mica’) 
(4 marks)
6. The irony is that as Chaplain he should be an example of care and 
compassion, yet he gleefully displays his lack of care for and 
brutality towards the students, even using scriptural allusion to 
support his attitude.
(3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
3
SECTION A cont’d
7. (a) Frightening OR horrifying. 
(1 mark)
(b) The synchronizing of his utterances with each stroke of the 
headmaster’s cane (‘rules are to be obeyed/whack; ‘yes, 
whack’) indicates his pleasure. He enthusiastically 
supports physical punishment.
(2 marks)
Total 20 marks
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
SECTION B
1. He worked non stop, Sundays as well as weekdays.
(1 mark)
2. Images: ‘blueblack cold; cracked hands; that ached from labour in 
the weekday weather’
Comment: The images depict the extreme severity of the weather 
and its punishing effect on the old man. ‘Blue black cold’ 
paints a picture of a winter so cold it has turned the old man 
black and blue – almost as if he is already dead. ‘That ached 
from labour in the weekday weather’ suggests constant, 
unrelenting exposure to the weather; ‘cracked hands’ suggests 
physical pain. 
 (2 marks for 2 images)
 (2 marks for fully explained comments) 
(4 marks)
3. He is selfless OR caring OR loving
(2 marks)
4. The speaker feels great pain or remorse as he reflects on his 
almost callous treatment of his father, the ways he had taken him 
for granted. This pain or remorse is conveyed in the repetition 
‘what did I know’ which sounds almost like a wail. The speaker 
realizes that his father had loved him though they had not 
communicated.
(1 mark for identification of the feeling) 
(3 marks for full discussion of the devices used to bring it across)
(4 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
4
SECTION B cont’d
5. Examples of metaphor: ‘blueblack cold’; ‘the cold splintering, 
breaking’; ‘driven out the cold’. 
 
Examples of personification: ‘the chronic angers of that house’
Comment: 
 -- blueblack cold – see question 2 above. NB: If this image was 
chosen for question 2, it cannot be chosen for question 5.
 -- ‘the cold splintering, breaking’ – conveys several pictures. 
Sound image – was the old man chopping wood to keep the house 
warm? Was there winter ice that was cracking as the fire the old 
man lit spread its warmth? This suggests that there was a war 
between heat and cold and the cold was giving the heat a knockout 
punch OR metaphor for tensions in the house – the relationship 
between father and son so chilling it is like winter ice.
 -- ‘driven out the cold’ evokes a picture of the cold as a live 
intruder that the old man is attacking.
 -- ‘the chronic angers of that house’ conveys a double meaning: the 
house so cold it seems the cold is angry; and the hostility or 
tension between the people in the house is as severe and long￾lasting as the winter.
 (1 mark for identification)
 (3 marks for fully explained comment)
(3 marks)
6. Examples of contrast:
-- heat (‘banked fires blazed’; ‘when the rooms were warm’) and 
cold
-- the father’s actions of love and the son’s indifference
-- the young boy and the adult father
-- the speaker’s boyhood self and his adult self looking back and 
reflecting
 
The contrast helps to evoke sadness OR wistfulness OR pain OR a 
sense of conflict.
 (1 mark for identifying a contrast)
 (4 marks for well developed explanation)
(5 marks)
Total 20 marks
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
5
SECTION C
1. ‘Rounded and curved’
‘She was the most appealing’
‘Her ... carried her like a princess’
(2 marks)
2. The writer repeats phrases eg. ‘but Granny (threw him out / put 
him off) in a humorous way to show the extent of Granny’s 
determination-no one below backra status was good enough for Miss 
Dorcas. It amusingly shows Granny’s determination to interfere 
OR Granny’s domineering control OR Granny’s possessiveness.
(3 marks for a fully developed answer focusing on effect of 
repetition as a technique)
(3 marks)
3. Her awareness of the opportunity for social mobility and her 
alertness in learning what she had to do in an attempt to achieve 
it OR her determination to get what she wanted.
(2 marks)
4. He is calculating OR he is an opportunist. 
(2 marks)
5. The writer sets her up in the backra-house where she behaves like 
the mistress of the house – the pride that goes before a fall –
and then he announces Mr Bill’s intention to marry a real backra 
girl.
 
(4 marks)
6. In paragraph 1 Miss Dorcas is a polished princess, in paragraph 4 
she has changed to a wildcat OR in paragraph 1 Miss Dorcas is the 
most desireable woman, in paragraph 4 she is devastatingly 
rejected. 
 (3 marks for a fully explained answer)
(3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
6
SECTION C cont’d
7. Title should highlight ironies OR hazards of ONE of the 
following:
 -- conceit
 -- social climbing / snobbery
 -- the overriding powers of grandmothers / parental figures 
 -- ‘anancyism’
 -- any other reasonable theme
 (1 mark for appropriate title)
 (up to 3 marks for justification)
(4 marks)
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
2
Rubric for Language and Organization 
Level of Performance Criteria
Excellent to superior
8-10
 Demonstrates excellent organizing 
skills: essay format with coherent 
presentation of points, effective 
linkages, well executed 
introduction, paragraphs 
 Demonstrates excellent grammar, 
sentence and syntactical 
structures, fluent or elegant style
Good
6 - 7 
 Demonstrates good organizing 
skills: points clear; uses 
introduction and coherent 
paragraphs
 Demonstrates fluent use of English 
with minor errors
Acceptable
4 - 5 
 Essay not as cohesive, but 
paragraphing used
 Several errors in language 
Weak
3 
 Weak organizing skills: very flawed 
paragraphing, or sectionalizing of 
essay answers, or little 
understanding of paragraphing
 Many errors in language
Very Weak
2 
 Little demonstration of essay 
format, few or no organizing skills
 Many language errors which hinder
meaning
Extremely Weak
<2
 Many language errors or too little 
information presented to make an 
assessment
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
3
Rubric for Content 
Level of 
Performance Criteria
Excellent to 
superior
19-25 
 Demonstrates in-depth and thorough 
knowledge of texts 
 Demonstrates excellent understanding 
of questions; where appropriate, 
makes comparative statements about 
texts
 Demonstrates excellent synthesis & 
analysis 
 Demonstrates appropriate & effective 
use of illustration/examples
 Demonstrates awareness, application & 
evaluation of writer’s craft
 Demonstrates sensitivity, personal 
response, and an understanding of the 
text as an integrated whole
 Makes appropriate value judgements, 
recognizes issues and thematic 
significance 
Good
14-18
 Demonstrates good knowledge of texts
 Demonstrates good understanding of 
questions
 Demonstrates fair -- good synthesis & 
analysis 
 Illustration/examples reasonable, not 
as many or as fully developed 
Acceptable
9-13  Demonstrates knowledge of some texts, 
or knowledge of texts only adequate
 Demonstrates fair understanding of 
questions
 Illustration/examples not full but 
reference made
 Literal level of analysis, may engage 
in story telling
Weak
5-8  Limited knowledge of texts
 Little or no analysis
 Illustration/examples flawed or 
inadequate
Very Weak  Very little or questionable knowledge 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
4
Level of 
Performance Criteria
2-4 of text 
 Little attempt to meet the demands of 
the question 
 Little or no organization skills
Extremely Weak
<2  Effort not in essay format
 No understanding of texts. 
Demonstrate high levels of 
unpreparedness. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
5
Question 1
(a) Describe what happens in this scene up to the point where Theseus 
leaves the stage. 
[8 marks] 
Hermia’s father Egeus has brought his daughter and her lover 
Lysander before Theseus to ask for is intervention in the dispute 
among them. Hippolyta, Thesesus’ Amazon bride to be, is also 
present. Egeus asks Theseus to force Hermia to give up Lysander 
and marry Demetrius, whom he has picked out for her and who has 
accompanied them to court. If she refuses, he wants Theseus to 
give him permission to dispose of her in whatever way he sees 
fit. Theseus agrees with Egeus’ stance, in keeping with Athenian 
law, which dictates that a father has sole rights over his unwed 
daughter — she is his property. Hermia stands up for herself and 
challenges the duke and her father. She says she is in love with 
Lysander, and will marry only him. Even when Theseus threatens 
her with the law, which stipulates that must either marry the man 
her father has chosen or stay unmarried forever, Hermia says she 
would rather accept the punishment than marry a man she does not 
love. She tells Theseus her father can marry Demetrius if he is 
so in love with the young man. Lysander and Demetrius both also 
have their say. Demetrius tells Hermia and Demetrius to give in, 
since his ‘right’ to Hermia’s hand is indisputable. Lysander 
argues that Egeus has no good reason to refuse him Hermia’s hand, 
since not only are he and Hermia in love, but he is at least as 
rich as Demetrius. Furthermore, Demetrius has broken faith with 
another girl, Helena, who is still in love with him. Theseus 
admits that he has heard about Demetrius’ treatment of Helena but 
has had no time to think about it. He leaves the stage, inviting 
Demetrius and Egeus to come with him so he can give them some 
advice and ask them to do some work for his wedding. Hippolyta 
also leaves with Theseus. Lysander and Hermia are left alone on 
stage.
An answer that mentions the role of all the characters on stage 
and outlines the central conflict in sufficient detail
(6 - 8 marks)
An answer that outlines the central conflict but omits some of 
the characters 
(4 – 5 marks)
A 
knowledge of
sketchy answer or an answer that demonstrates insufficient 
text
(Up to 3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
6
Question 1 cont’d
(b) What do you learn about Hermia’s character from this scene, and 
how is this view of her character supported by subsequent events 
in the play? 
 She is respectful but fearless ‘I do entreat your grace to pardon 
me/I know not by what power I am made bold’). 
 She is very determined to have her way. 
 She believes in true love over male law or paternal dictates. 
 She is willing to fight for her beliefs. 
 She is not intimidated by men — she defends her case in a court 
in which she is the only woman except the subdued Amazon queen. 
 She is fierce and passionate about what she believes in OR she is 
driven by passion. 
 She is heroic — being willing to stay unmarried in a society that 
looks down on single women (there is even a suggestion that 
Theseus means to put her in a cloister/convent). 
TWO qualities well developed - 3 marks each (6 marks)
How this view of her character is supported by subsequent events: 
She runs away with Lysander, braving the unknown, unafraid of possible 
consequences of being an unmarried woman alone with a man. Up to the 
point where Oberon’s magic takes over, she controls Lysander’s actions 
in the woods (telling him to sleep at a distance from her). When 
Demetrius pursues her in the wood, she curses him vigorously, and she 
even takes on Helena, who is bigger than she is, in a cat fight when 
Oberon’s magic shifts Lysander’s attentions from her to Helena. What 
is amusing is that in the wood Hermia throws off all the decorum she 
had shown in front of Theseus. Helena tells us that in fact she had 
been ‘a vixen’ in school. It seems that once she in in a free space, 
Hermia’s strong personality blossoms even further. Significantly, 
Hermia, unlike the men, never comes under Oberon’s spell. 
(3 marks)
[9 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
7
Question 1 cont’d
(c) Discuss the ways in which Hermia’s character challenges the 
conventional role of women in society. 
Hermia represents a radical challenge to strictures about women’s 
place in male-dominated Athens and by extension Shakespeare’s 
society. The entire play shows that these strictures hold very 
strong. Even in fairyland where Oberon and Titania are supposedly 
equal rulers, Oberon wants to rule Titania. The rude 
mechanicals’ play is about lovers who die because of similar 
social strictures against women in Babylon. Hermia is quite 
heroic and her attitude must have had a major effect on members 
of Shakespeare’s audience, whether shock, consternation, support, 
or joy.
She goes against the following:
 The (male) Duke has sole authority over his subjects
 Daughters are their father’s property
 Marriage is a market/business transaction in which the 
woman is sold to the highest bidder even if he’s 
dishonorable (Demetrius, by Lysander’s report, has jilted 
Helena after ‘making love’ to her, and Egeus must have 
known this since obviously it is widely rumoured)
 A woman’s feelings are irrelevant in marriage
 Women are delicate
 Women are/should be timid
 A woman who runs away with a man is dishonorable
Any other reasonable answer
TWO well developed points - 4 marks each [8 marks] 
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
8
Question 2
(a) Identify TWO of these worlds and explain how they are different 
from each other.
The worlds: the world of the Amazons; the fairy world; the upper 
class world of the Athenian court; the working class world of the 
rude mechanicals
Identification of two worlds (2 marks)
Differences 
Amazon (shown in the play only through Hippolyta, their Queen. 
Theseus reports that he conquered her and has brought her to 
Athens to marry him). 
 -- ruled by women, men not welcome
 -- serious
Athenian Court and upper class
 -- ruled by men/ Theseus, male power and male law dominant
 -- parental dictates valued over personal choice
 -- marriage arranged, love takes second place 
 -- serious
Fairy world
 -- has both King and Queen, with equal powers
 -- love allowed to thrive, is even magically assisted - law of 
feelings dominant
 -- both serious and comical
World of ‘rude mechanicals’
 -- freedom dominant—the men decide for themselves that they 
want to put on a play for the Duke’s wedding
 -- no women
 -- ruled by theatre/carnival (rules of playwriting and acting, 
Bottom as comic leader)
 -- humorous/hilarious
Discussion of two differences, well developed with evidence – 2 x 3 
marks
(6 marks)
[8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
9
Question 2 cont’d
(b) Discuss how Shakespeare uses the plot to connect the worlds. [8 marks]
The Amazon and upper class Athenian worlds meet when Theseus 
conquers Hippolyta the queen of the Amazons in battle and takes 
her to Athens to wed. Hippolyta is further drawn into the 
Athenian world as she is present when Hermia is brought before 
Theseus for disobeying the male law. She is also drawn into the 
working class world when Bottom and his crew perform their play 
at her wedding. Though she does not know it, the fairy world also 
affects her because the fairies come to bless the house after the 
wedding.
The upper class and fairy worlds meet through the lovers. Hermia 
and Lysander take refuge in the fairy wood in the hope of being 
able to find happiness and to escape the tyranny of the Athenian 
court. Demetrius, in love with Hermia, pursues them there and 
Helena who is in love with him, pursues Demetrius in the hope of 
weaning him away from Hermia. Oberon the fairy king gets 
mistakenly involved in their affairs as he overhears them talking 
and decides to try and right the situation by secret magic, with 
hilarious and often suspenseful results. The complications 
eventually get sorted out by Oberon’s magic. Just as all this is 
resolved, the Duke turns up in the fairy wood, pardons Hermia and 
Lysander and takes the lovers back to court. 
Working class Athenian and fairy worlds meet through theatre: The 
rude mechanicals meet in the fairy wood to practise their play. 
Their self appointed leader, Bottom, gets caught in Oberon’s 
plots, is turned into a donkey and is then kidnapped by Oberon’s 
wife Titania, who falls in love with him in his donkey form. This 
is because she has been put under a spell by her husband, who is 
punishing her for refusing to give him an Indian boy she has in 
her possession. 
Working class Athenian, fairy, and upper class Athenian worlds 
meet through theatre: When Oberon finally relents and removes the 
spell, the rude mechanicals emerge from the fairy wood to perform 
their play before the Duke Queen Hippolyta and the other human 
characters. The play ends with the fairies blessing the Duke’s 
house as Bottom’s crew finishes their play.
A full discussion of all the events that link the two worlds; must 
mention setting (wood, court etc) since in this play the setting is an 
integral part of shifts in events 
(6 - 8 marks)
A discussion of the main events that link the two worlds 
(4 - 5 marks)
A sketchy discussion or discussion showing insufficient knowledge of 
plot (Up to 3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
10
Question 2 cont’d
(c) As these worlds interact, what similarities do you notice between 
them? 
Possible similarities include (candidates must discuss examples
from text for each)
 
 conflict
 gender wars/differences
 power struggles
 tyranny 
 complicated by love OR desire
 illusion as a powerful force
 any other reasonable answer
Any 2 similarities fully discussed 2 x 4 marks (8 marks)
Comment on Shakespeare’s purpose (1 mark)
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 3
(a) Briefly describe Pa Ben’s role in the opening scene.
Pa Ben’s role as narrator
Pa Ben announces his role as narrator by intoning ‘Old Story 
time, Old Story Time.’ After he sets the stage for the story, we 
see the young Len, his mother and later Pearl, his childhood 
friend. The audience sees first hand, the conflict between Len 
and his mother from way in the past. Issues of blackness, 
identity and advancement are brought across. 
Through flashbacks and Pa Ben’s narration, the audience sees time 
sequences: Pearl’s five pregnancies grow into eleven pregnancies; 
the young Len and the mature, accomplished Len, the Sly George as 
a boy and as an adult, are seen.
Pa Ben controls the action and directs the audience to crucial 
themes such as race and class issues. 
Pa Ben’s role as social commentator
Pa Ben introduces the audience to issues of history and culture. 
Audience is made aware of how things were in the past – limited 
advancement/social mobility for blacks. Living conditions were 
equally bad – bad roads, no water, no electricity. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
11
Question 3 cont’d
Pa Ben’s role as character
Pa Ben’s centrality as a major character is highlighted. He is 
neighbour to Miss Aggy and therefore close to the action. He 
interfaces with all the major characters and is Len’s confidante. 
Through Pa Ben, all the important themes are brought across. 
Pa Ben’s role as director
Pa Ben’s action in changing scenes as in his initiation of the 
song, “Change the house round” to convert Miss Aggy’s house to 
the bank scene with Lois and George. 
Pa Ben’s re-setting of the stage in putting the chairs back in 
place as he and Miss Aggy prepare to go to Pa Zaccy‘s nine night.
Pa Ben’s input in the action as he bridges gaps in the story as 
it unfolds (e.g. informing us about George’s marriage and 
commenting on it, describing his visits to Len’s school on 
occasions when he accompanied Miss Aggy. 
Any 2 points, 4 marks each [8 marks]
(b) How does Pa Ben introduce the concept of “old story time” in this 
scene? 
The concept of “old story time” is brought across through:
 His own narrative of the past – his father’s penchant for 
storytelling and the rituals involved (drinking rum, singing)
 Pa Ben’s repetition of “Old Story time, Ole Story time” to begin 
his storytelling event (a kind of call to arms/a summoning of the 
village)
 The events, places, people – all in the past, although he was a 
key participant and observer to the story he is going to tell
 Naming (his own name and reference to Pa Zaccy) 
 Common courtesies, for example “All well,” and reminding George 
that “thanks” is part of rural value system. 
Any 2 points, 4 marks each [8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
12
Question 3 cont’d
(c) How does Pa Ben’s role in the Act foreshadow his role in the rest 
of the play?
 Pivotal to the action – present or within earshot of most of the 
action
 Keeper of secrets (and Pa Ben being the balance between Len, Lois 
and Miss Aggy)
 Adds to tension 
 Adds to suspense 
 He continues to speak to the audience, bridging gaps in the 
narrative
Any 3 points, 3 marks each [9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 4
“Most elements of the play Old Story Time contribute to the theme of 
class and colour prejudice.” To what extent is this true of TWO of the 
following?
Characters 
 The black, brown/near white characters are presented to reflect 
the ethos of the period. The colonial society is reflected in the 
socio-economic and socio-political realities of the blacks being 
at the bottom and the near whites at the top and the typical 
demarcation of the underprivileged and privileged. However, as 
time passes, we see that in the later years (1970s) things have 
begun to change somewhat.
 Miss Aggy is filled with self-hate (“anything black no good’) and 
drums this into her son to aspire to Miss Margaret, the pastor’s 
daughter, with long hair down her back. 
 Using characters to bring across contrasts – the black Pearl 
(perpetually pregnant, who might have been different had she had 
the home support) and Lois, who was the first black woman to work 
in the bank.
 Exploring stereotypes and the irony involved – the white George 
(mongoose) is a schemer and quite dishonest (an ironic response 
to Miss Aggy’s belief that blackness is “no good.”)
 Len and Lois represent black people who are breaking the glass 
ceiling. Rhone presents them as very mindful of their roots as 
poor working class. They never come across as people who will 
show off on less fortunate black people. They will not adopt the 
colonial ways.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
13
Question 4 cont’d
 Pa Ben as wise, experienced commentator discusses the theme of 
class-colour prejudice in different ways. He criticizes Miss 
Aggie’s self-hate and George’s marriage.
Setting 
The technical aspects of the stage/staging and the physical 
locations/scenes contribute to the theme of class and colour 
prejudice:
 Miss Aggie’s house in the rural village, with chamber pot and 
outside toilet contrasted with the bank where upper class/near 
white George reigns supreme; contrasted also with Munro College 
where Len who is black and poor is abused by white upper and 
middle class boys. This setting is introduced by the sound of 
horse - drawn buggies depicting the domain of the rich. All of 
these together show how much the lighter skinned people were in 
control in the past
 The house in town where Len and Lois live. The fact that this is 
a well–appointed house and that they live on the same street as 
George shows that in the 1970s things are beginning to change —
black people are breaking the glass ceilings through education, 
ambition and intelligence.
 The fact that the same set is changed around to become all these 
various locations (for example, the song ‘Change the house 
around’ is sung while this happens) becomes symbolic that the 
class-colour divides of the past are not fixed in stone — change 
is coming.
Costuming 
The divisions among people based on class and colour are identified 
and portrayed: 
 Peasantry costume
 Miss Aggy’s market clothes, Pearl’s tattered attire, Pa Ben’s 
clothing
 George’s suits
 switching or donning pieces of clothing (hats for example) to 
indicate change in status (for example, Lois changing into bank 
teller’s clothes, Len in the present in suit showing he has 
breached the class-colour divide).
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
14
Question 4 cont’d
Flashbacks
Flashbacks contribute to colour and class prejudice: 
 The first flashback introduces the audience to the main themes in 
the play – blackness, identity, advancement, class restrictions. 
Miss Aggy beats Len because he associates with Pearl, the 
“frowsy-tail, jiggerfoot…board head gal”. She insists instead 
that he cultivate the friendship of Margaret, the “nice brown 
girl with tall hair down to her back.” 
 The time shifts allow the audience to make comparisons of events, 
behaviours and people: Len’s treatment at school by George, 
Margaret and the well to do; George’s blackmailing of Lois; Miss 
Aggie and George
 Flashbacks allow the audience deeper understanding of events and 
consequences, for example, Lois’ stealing to help Len and the 
subsequent blackmail; George’s threat of making an example of her 
race by exposing her.
Any 2 elements with any 3 points fully developed, using examples from 
the text, 4 marks each 2 x 3 x 4 (24 marks)
Showing that the two elements inter-relate (1 mark)
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 5
(a) Briefly outline the experience of the persona in EACH poem. 
The experience of the persona in each poem:
“Dulce”
A soldier vividly describes the horrors of war as he helplessly 
watches one of his comrades being “gassed.” Returning from the 
battle scene, “bent double,” coughing and limping with blood-shod 
feet, they had not heard the gas-filled shells being dropped. 
Most managed to escape, but this one comrade did not. The 
experience is traumatic for the soldier who recounts this 
experience of his unfortunate comrade and lashes out at all who 
buy into or are brainwashed into thinking that it is a good thing
to die for one’s country.
 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
15
Question 5 cont’d
“Dark Time”
The speaker describes his country at war and being taken over by 
foreign forces. The landscape is changed. All are sad, anxious 
and afraid. Gunshots ring out daily and even nature seems to take
part in this national mourning. 
4 marks each [8 marks]
(b) Discuss the ways in which EACH poet conveys the horror of the 
experience.
Ways in which EACH poet conveys the horror of the experience: 
The following devices/strategies should be connected to the 
horror of the experience of war. Mention must be made of how they 
enhance/heighten the feeling of repulsion/revulsion and general 
distaste of war. Sound and sight imagery must be linked to 
emotions evoked and mental pictures created in the mind of the 
reader. Figurative devices should suggest how the experience is 
horrible for the speaker and by extension, the reader. 
“Dulce’
Any two devices: 
 Vivid diction: graphic words/ideas – blood-shod feet; white eyes 
writhing; froth-corrupted lungs; blood gargling
 Imagery, especially relating to sight and sound: “thick green 
light,” “white eyes writhing;” “blood/come gargling”; (these are 
also metaphors)
 Simile: “like old beggars under sacks; ” “as under a green sea;” 
“like a devil’s sick of sin;” “obscene as cancer;” “bitter as 
cud”
 Metaphor: “an ecstasy of fumbling”
 Repetition: “all” in stanza one; “gas” in stanza 2; the many 
words ending with “-ing” and the choking/stifling feeling 
generated e.g. fumbling, stumbling, flound’ring, guttering, 
choking, drowning, smothering, 
 Irony: the title as against the poem itself (way in which the 
poem exposes this “lie”)
“Dark time”
 
Any two devices: 
 Repetition: “dark”/”dark time;” repetition in questioning (last 
stanza)
 Imagery: sight and sound, especially: use of colours (red flowers 
[blood?], brown beetles, dark time, strained and anxious faces; 
gunshots
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
16
Question 5 cont’d
 Oxymoron: “festival of guns”; “carnival of misery”
 Personification: “Red flowers bend their heads in awful sorrow”
 Metaphor: “brown beetles” could allude to army invasion
 Contrast: boot of steel versus the slender grass, showing the 
vulnerability of the people versus the brutality of the invaders
Any 2 devices well explained for each poem, 2 marks each [8 marks]
(c) What comment does each poem make on the subject of war? 
“Dulce”
Any two of: 
 Being on the battlefield is a horrifying experience. It 
dehumanizes people. Many are scarred for life. The feeling of 
helplessness and hopelessness is horrifying.
 Dying in the above - mentioned scenario is not noble. 
 The stereotypical assumptions about war and fighting for country 
are lies. Children (or the young and those anxious for glory) 
should not buy into this belief.
 The “old lie” is exposed and explored though what might be seen 
as an eye-witness account.
 When we have an intimate knowledge or experience (as in the dying 
soldier’s reaching for the speaker to help him) we are able to 
see what is taken for granted with fresh eyes.
“Dark Time”
Any two of: 
 War affects all. 
 War is so dehumanizing that even nature makes a statement (as in 
pathetic fallacy).
 There is a kind of helplessness that comes with war.
 War imposes itself on a nation’s culture (festival, carnival)
 War robs a nation of its independence and its dreams (“aiming at 
your dream”)
Any 2 comments made for each poem, 2 marks each (8 marks)
Any attempt at comparison/synthesis (1 mark)
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
17
Question 6
(a) For EACH poem, discuss the prejudice, showing how it affects the 
actions of individuals. 
A model answer will identify the type of prejudice, outline the 
context in which the prejudice is being demonstrated or 
contemplated, and discuss how and why it manifests in the actions 
of the character/s who practise it or are victimized by it. For 
example, a discussion of ‘Dreaming Black Boy’ in answer to this 
question should include this information: the picture is 
presented of a little black boy in Jim Crow America thinking 
about the ways in which racial prejudice as practiced by whites 
has surrounded his life and attacked his dreams. His teacher 
ignores him in class, he is given sub-standard education so that 
he will have to ‘lick boots for a living’, he cannot travel the 
globe freely because hotel owners might bar him from entering 
their premises. We get the sense that the boy is sitting by 
himself musing sadly.
[8 marks]
(b) Demonstrate how the poet’s use of any one device heightens the 
presentation of this effect in EACH poem. 
The model answer will also identify a device and discuss examples
of HOW the device works to sharpen the reader’s awareness of the 
effects of the prejudice. ‘How’ means that it is not enough to 
name the device and its effect, but to demonstrate exactly how it 
manages to achieve this effect. Here is a good example: ‘In 
“Dreaming Black Boy” the poet’s use of the repetition “I wish…” 
throughout the poem achieves several effects. For example, 
because it begins every stanza, we get a sense that the boy is 
constantly repeating to himself the ways in which he longs for a 
world without racial prejudice. This conveys a sense that the 
prejudice surrounds his entire life, and that he is in constant 
pain because of it.’ A less effective answer might identify the 
device, give an example and state the effect without showing how
we got there. For example ‘The speaker’s repetition of ‘I wish’ 
tells you that racial prejudice hurts him.’ The least effective 
type of answer will sketchily mention the device and the effect 
‘The poet uses repetition to show how the racial prejudice hurts 
the boy.’ The element of personal response—how the poet’s use of 
the device affects your own thoughts or emotions will enhance the 
quality of this model essay. 
[8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
18
Question 6 cont’d
(c) What issues does EACH poet raise by his or her exploration of the 
theme of prejudice? 
The model answer will identify important general principles or 
ideas (the poet’s messages) that emerge from the poet’s treatment 
of prejudice. 
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 7
(a) Describe what we learn from the narrator about the life and 
personality of Mister Papacita. 
 He brought joy to the children with his songs as he engaged them 
with the call and response communal activity
 Through the ribaldry of some of his songs he also introduced 
adult themes to the children and helped to bond the adult 
community through entertainment.
 He made work blessed as he blended his garden work with songs
 He beat drums and chanted at wakes and funerals and weddings
 He became a different person at weddings/community gatherings of 
mourning or celebration—physically he was transformed and he 
transformed others as they heard his songs and hymns.
 He was the perfect husband and friend to Miss Aita, except that
he refused to go to church with her. 
 A turning point came in his life when Miss Aita died. His life￾giving spirit left him, and he turned to drink.
 He became unruly and unmanageable, destroying the furniture in 
his house and leaving a trail of grief in the community.
 In his drunken state, he would call on all to serve God, as if 
Miss Aita’s churchgoing had somehow had a deep unconscious effect 
on him, or as if he felt unaccountably guilty about her death.
 After his hospital visits for detoxification he returned as a 
spiritless, tired old man, and rejected attempts by the villagers 
to lure him to church. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
19
Question 7 cont’d
 Then another turning point came—the climax of the narrative. 
Unexpectedly, mysteriously, he joined the staid Weslyan church. 
At his baptism his early spirit of music returned and caused 
several conversions, most of which did not last. He, however, 
remained faithful to his church. 
 The reader, like the narrator, is left with more questions than 
answers (silence) about the real reason for Mister Papacita’s 
conversion. 
A well expressed answer that covers Mister Papacita’s 
relationship with the children, the adults, the community as a 
whole, and Miss Aita; the significance of these relationships; 
and 
the issue of silence
the turning points in Mister Papacita’s life that introduce 
. [9 marks]
(b) By what strategies does the narrator reveal her attitude to 
Mister Papacita?
 The narrator maintains a child’s perspective on Mister Papacita, 
so her naïve puzzlement about the reasons for his change is 
convincing
 At first, like the other children, she is excited by and welcomes 
Mister Papacita’s singing, games, jokes etc. This is shown in the 
descriptions she uses (diction, images etc)
 The narrator expresses perplexity about the changes in Mr 
Papacita’s character through her constant use of questions
 She is confused by the change in Mister Papacita after Miss 
Aita’s death, and she uses the strategy of the community’s gossip 
to explore the possible reasons
 She intuitively compares the reasons put forward for the changes 
and shows her bias in the process—she reveals her preference for 
the colourful Mister Papacita, indicating that to her, he is ‘the 
real Mr Papacita.’
Any 2 strategies fully developed, 4 marks each [8 marks]
(c) How does the story of Mister Papacita’s life contribute to ONE 
theme in the text as a whole? 
 The theme of experience — how adults and children’s perspectives 
differ. (sometimes the narrator is young and naïve; at other 
times she is a reflecting adult seeking to make sense of life and 
events) 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
20
Question 7 cont’d
 The role of the church and its meaning and relevance to the 
community as a whole
 The nature and meaning of silence, the part that music and 
harmony, and chaos and noise play in expanding our understanding 
of silence
 The nature and meaning of silence — what for example is the 
connection between visible action and hidden mutation?
 Relationships — how opposites can attract. 
Any 1 theme fully discussed [8 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 8
Use the character Nathan to discuss the ways in which Forbes presents 
the theme of silence.
The chapters of Songs of Silence hold together as a chorus of songs 
from one community, but shaped by the recollections of a narrator 
whose perspective ranges from the innocence of childhood to the 
maturity of a young adult who emerges unbroken from a failed 
relationship. In the chapter ‘Nathan’, the narrator is the reflective 
adult with a sophisticated notion of the wide range of meanings 
‘silence’ holds. Through the character of Nathan she is able to 
present some aspects of this theme, which runs throughout the text in 
many different ways. 
 Nathan acts strategically without words, but with potent meaning —
revenge (poking Tony’s eye). 
 Silence is a characteristic feature of Nathan’s personality, which 
is deep and profound even though he uses few words. The absence of 
words can mask/hide a great deal.
 Nathan’s deep and profound silence was evident even from his birth 
and the close connection he had with his sister, the narrator –
‘…soulmates, welded together by our common need for silence.’ They 
both started speaking late. However, her silence was different from 
his — ‘he was a man of dark blue silences,’ hers ‘was a silence of 
moons.’ Here the narrator suggests that contrary to the saying 
‘silence means consent’, silence dies not always mean one thing nor 
are all silent people to be treated the same. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
21
Question 8 cont’d 
 The ‘manna manna manna mahkita’ game establishes the communication 
between the narrator and Nathan. It has unspoken personal meaning 
for them and suggests that its ritual is imbued with almost 
religious or spiritual significance. It shows that codes of 
communication that may seem meaningless to others looking on, may be 
a way of expressing connections that [known] words cannot express.
 The different silences of the siblings allow them to explore, define 
and find their own authentic selves in their own ways. (Narrator and 
ants, Nathan and tightfistedness with money). Silence, like 
language, can express identity.
 Forbes presents the narrator speculating on the genesis of Nathan’s 
tightfistedness — was it a reaction to their parents’ wastefulness 
or their loud quarreling? Silence generates questions that try to 
fill up the space of what we don’t know/what silence withholds from 
us. This idea is one of the most pervasive throughout the entire 
book.
 Silence emerges as fate — instrumental even in their adult years, in 
ironic ways, as illustrated by the fact that the narrator ‘entered a 
profession that fractured [her] silence’ and Nathan married a 
‘noisy’ woman. Silence is insufficient just as speech is 
insufficient—both Nathan and his sister look for their opposites in 
order to complete their personalities, just as Miss Effie went 
silent after speech betrayed her.
 Colours are a major element in defining the nature of silence, just 
as colours differentiated the nature of Mister Papacita’s music. 
 Water-river or sea — is also used to define/differentiate the nature 
of silences (as in ‘Morris Hole’). This is similar to the ‘snail’s 
shell upon my back’ in ‘The Woman with No Name.’
 Through these symbols and images Forbes helps us to understand 
intuitively the narrator’s conflict with her brothers, and Nathan 
particularly, as she gains greater awareness of her femaleness in 
response to their overwhelming maleness. Are women’s silences 
different from men’s, and men’s words different from women’s? (‘mine 
was a silence of moons’). These are some of the questions we ask.
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
22
Question 9
‘Bolo is a heroic figure whose heroism was not always understood by 
those around him.’ Discuss the character of Bolo in light of this 
statement.
Candidates do not need to agree with the statement. ‘Discuss’ 
indicates that a candidate may agree fully or partially or not at all. 
This question requires the candidate to indicate the definition of 
heroism that will guide the essay. As with other essays, scripts that 
make some reference to the author’s techniques indicate superiority. 
Candidates should include examples to prove their points.
Possible definitions of heroism: 
 defying great odds or dangers in order to fight for what one 
believes in
 sacrificing (for example, one’s life) for others
 sacrificing for others (for example, one’s life) even when they 
don’t understand us or our sacrifice
 having a vision of the greater good and being willing to take the 
lead in bringing it to fruition
 standing up for one’s beliefs in the face of great hardship, even 
putting oneself at risk
 standing up for others in the face of great hardship, even putting 
oneself at risk
 being willing to lead others in dangerous situations, in pursuit of 
high ideals
Instances of Bolo’s heroism: 
 At the end of the first chapter Bolo is introduced as ‘the warrior 
still’ who is shocked and heartbroken by the church’s self 
rejection. Warrior’ introduces the idea that he will be a fighter, 
his heartbreak introduces the idea of what he will fight for—ideals. 
Bolo’s idealistic insight is contrasted with the church’s pragmatic 
acceptance of defeat. Bolo represents an ideal and a promise. ‘
 Bolo fearlessly questions the dominant views of the group about Ivan 
Morton. He does not believe, as they do, that Morton is a man of the 
people or that talking to him will lead to their advancement or 
freedom from persecution. 
 Bolo is not afraid to defy the authorities. He recognizes that the 
colonial police are the enemies of the people and he feels ‘We have 
to kill Prince.’ He understands this at a literal and symbolic 
level. This contrasts with Bee and Eva, who as representatives of 
the church and the people, even accept their son’s application to 
the constabulary. Bee and Eva are heroic enough to break the law by 
worshipping in their own way, but they lack the radical daring of 
Bolo.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
23
Question 9 cont’d
 When he fights against Prince and the other policemen for arresting 
his mother among the worshippers, Bolo’s heroism is realized through 
his blood relations 
Possible points of view in response to the statement:
(i) Bolo is a heroic figure who was not given a chance to display his 
full heroism as the people he defended were too afraid to work 
with him against the colonial authorities. They did understand 
him but were afraid.
(ii) Bolo has potentially great qualities but he becomes mean-spirited 
and judgemental when his people do not agree with his approach to 
fighting the colonial authorities. A true hero is able to 
understand the people he wants to help, and does not humiliate or 
hurt them.
(iii) Bolo is a warrior hero but his people no longer want [or needs] 
warrior heroes; they want educated leaders who can use the system 
to beat the system.
(iv) Bolo is an anti-hero — one of those characters in books who rebel 
against everything an unjust and hypocritical society views as 
heroic. Through such characters, authors send a message to 
society, which often does not understand the anti-hero, and may 
even despise him.
Some points to support (i):
 Bolo is a stickfighter in the carnival tradition. So he is 
associated with the warrior hero. He is strong and bold and loves 
his people, does not think only of himself but of them. At the end 
of the first chapter he is introduced as the ‘warrior still’, who is 
shocked and heartbroken at the Spiritual Baptist church’s acceptance 
of the unjust law. He also tells them that they are wrong about 
Ivan Morton. He does not believe, as they do, that Morton is a man 
of the people or that talking to him will lead to their advancement 
or freedom from persecution. Bolo’s idealistic insight contrasts 
with the church’s pragmatic acceptance of defeat. His willingness to 
tell them the truth shows that he cares for them and that he is 
offering himself as their leader.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
24
Question 9 cont’d
 It is clear his people do love and admire Bolo, even though they are 
not able to rise to his level of heroism. Eva, the narrator, 
presents him in a sympathetic manner, and tries to understand him 
even though much of what she learns about his behaviour is reported 
to her third hand. As a member of the community that deserts him, 
Eva accepts blame for Bolo’s tragic demise and describes him as a 
crucified Christ. After his death she says he is not dead and hopes 
he never dies. By this she means that his memory, the memory of the 
things he tried to teach them but which they were too afraid to 
learn, and the memory of their shame and how they failed him, will 
live on.
 Bolo recognizes that the colonial police are the people’s natural 
enemies. The brutal officer Prince represents the worst excesses of 
the Police force, and it is clear from Eva’s narration that he is 
despised and feared. But while Bolo argues that ‘We have to kill 
Prince’, Bee and Eva, who can be seen as representing the church’s 
and the village’s attitudes, fail to send the right message to 
their son Winston and so Winston joins the police force. Bee is 
enraged and ashamed at this betrayal of ideals on Winston’s part. 
But unlike what Bolo would have done, he still tells Winston to go 
ahead. When Bolo says ‘we have to kill Prince,’ he means this at 
both a symbolic and literal level. Bee and Eva’s heroism goes only 
so far as to declare ‘we have to break the law’, meaning that they 
will worship in their own way in spite of the law against it. They 
are too afraid to accept Bolo’s radical solution. They are afraid 
for their children; also they feel defying the law by violence will 
only bring more violence down on them. Yet they love and admire Bolo 
and feel he is destined for great things (Eva’s descriptions). 
 Bolo matches heroic actions to words: he fights physically against 
Prince for arresting his mother; and fights Innocent for taking 
advantage of 17 year-old Lester, both in support of Lester and to 
show the community that they had turned against themselves in the 
most unjust way.
 When Bolo turns ‘badjohn’ it is still in an effort to make his 
people learn self-defence and courageous action. His rogue-like 
behaviour has a kind of logic in it – to show that he detested what 
the community had become. The trend of the community turning against 
itself was most represented by Mitchell’s exploitative and corrupt 
business practices, and Bolo uses ‘badjohnism’ to protest against 
this. He takes the two sisters as a challenge to his people; he is 
most offended by the introduction of the police in what he believed 
was the community’s business. Eva’s narration tells us that he 
looked heartbroken when this happened, almost as if he were pleading 
with them to have the courage to face him instead. (The one person 
who ever stood up to him was Charleau, and as a result, they became 
friends).
 Bolo’s tragic death can indeed be blamed on the community. It is as 
though he sacrificed his innocence and good reputation, even his 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
25
self - on their behalf, to no avail. Fear of the colonial powers 
made them impotent. Bolo is a tragic hero.
Any other reasonable point
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
26
Question 9 cont’d 
Some points to support (ii): 
Bolo’s great qualities include: champion stickfighter in the great 
warrior tradition of Africa and the carnival; community consciousness, 
idealism, and love for the people (‘...he don’t just fight to win 
battles for himself…and he do it with love and respect, more as if he
was making a gift of himself, offering himself…as if what he really 
want is for the people to see in him a beauty that wasn’t his alone, 
was theirs, ours…’).
 However, he fails to understand the real dilemmas the people face. 
Their fear for their children if they use violence is legitimate. 
Also, it is not easy for them to commit murder (‘kill Prince’), and 
they also want to promote civil society in which law works for them, 
not against them. They are trying to give Ivan Morton a chance to 
help them by legal means. They need to hope that one of their own 
has not really betrayed them. Bolo is right—they are shortsighted in 
not eventually getting up and fighting, whether physically or 
otherwise when it becomes clear Ivan is a traitor, but their point 
of view is understandable. Bolo isn’t able to see inside their minds 
but Eva as narrator is, and she gives a sympathetic portrayal of Bee 
and the others even though she too does not agree with them. 
 When Bolo kidnaps the two sisters and abuses Mitchell we lose 
sympathy for him no matter what Eva says. His treatment of them is 
inhumane and extreme. It seems he hopes that this will hold up to 
them a mirror of what they have become in their self-rejection, or a 
mirror of what the colonial establishment is doing to them. But how 
can people follow a leader who leads by fear or by terrorizing their 
children? How can love show itself in actions of hate? The tragedy 
of Bolo is that both he and the community became confused, one by 
disappointment, one by fear. Bolo’s confusion led to his loss of 
self and loss of heroism.
 Any other reasonable point
Some points to support (iii):
 The Caribbean has a long tradition of warrior heroes (for example,
Maroons, Three Finger Jack). The people usually love and admire 
them, but often they lead lonely lives as most people are afraid to 
adopt their radical means of resistance. Eva tells us several times 
that Bolo is ‘alone.’ Eva gives many descriptions showing the 
people’s admiration for Bolo’s physical beauty and strength, his 
stickfighting reputation and the fact that he is a ‘warrior still.’ 
But she also tells us several times that he is ‘alone.’ 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
27
Question 9 cont’d
 The people see Bolo more as a symbol than the leader they want. They 
do not believe in the kind of leadership he offers. They don’t want 
to meet violence with violence and kill Prince. This may be because 
of their cowardice or it could be because the society has changed. 
Eva says what the people need now to help them is the educated man 
who can take on the white man on his own terms. Eulalee’s rejection 
of Bolo for Ivan Morton is symbolic, as is Morton’s betrayal of her. 
 They pin all their hopes on Ivan Morton and even after he fails them 
they are afraid to adopt other means, and soon after, Bolo turns 
badjohn and they reject him even further, since now they are afraid 
of him.
 Going to prison may have brutalized Bolo and made him use violence 
against his people. But what it certainly does is show how alone he 
was — he is the only villager who went to jail because he is the 
only one who fought the police who arrested the church people 
unjustly (to defend his mother). It is most painful that no member 
of the group was sufficiently moved to join him. Bolo is a hero 
deserted by the people he fought for.
Any other reasonable point
Some points to support (iv): 
Anti-heroes are characters who do not have the traditional qualities 
of heroes, and often have opposite qualities to those of the 
traditional hero. They stand alone against society and are often 
disliked.
 Bolo starts off as a warrior hero admired by his people (see 
discussions at I, II and III). However, when he turns badjohn after 
the people desert him or fail to stand with him when he fights for 
his mother’s release, he begins to look more like an anti-hero. 
 Bolo becomes an anti-hero through his people’s fault (see 
discussions at I, II and III).
Any other reasonable point
3 marks for definition of heroism that candidate will use to guide the 
discussion.
Up to 8 marks for identification and description of Bolo’s heroic 
qualities and acts OR lack of such qualities and actions
Up to 7 marks for the interpretations of Bolo’s acts by those around 
him
4 marks each for 3 fully developed points about Bolo: 4x3=12
5 marks each for 2 fully developed points about those around him: 
5x2=10
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
28
Question 10
‘The Wine of Astonishment explores the ways in which power can be 
creative or destructive’. Dicuss with reference to one character in 
The Wine of Astonishment. 
Characters:
Bolo
Bolo’s power is both creative and destructive.
Creative: Bolo’s admirable qualities of power: Bolo is a champion 
carnival stickfighter who is looked up to and admired by the people of 
his community. Everyone admires him for this warrior prowess, and 
expects great things of him. The women admire him for his strength and 
physical grace as well as his sense of humour and community spirit. He 
is able to charm even the very old women. Bolo knows who he is and as 
a result is not afraid to speak out against the injustice meted out to 
his people or fight physically to free his mother when she is arrested 
unjustly. He is willing to take on the colonial establishment and 
‘kill Prince’, both literally and figuratively. Bolo’s power is 
multiple: the power of the warrior, the power of the charmer, the 
power of the revolutionary, the power that comes with self￾recognition. However, his potential to use his power lead the 
community and the church against the colonial establishment is lost as 
the people are too afraid to adopt his approach of direct, physical 
and radical resistance. They allow the power of the colonizer to win. 
This is the great tragedy of the novel.
Destructive yet ironically creative aspects of Bolo’s power: When 
Bolo’s power is not given its proper outlet he becomes a badjohn and 
terrorizes his people until they bring the police against him and he 
is killed. Bolo’s death however is not the end of his power. Eva the 
narrator says he is not dead, and she hopes he never dies. This 
suggests that Bolo still has power over the people’s memory. He has 
impressed them with his beauty and his strength. He has taught them 
shame, he has taught them how to be a man and not give in. 
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery — description of Bolo’s appearance etc
 Symbolism - Bolo as stickfighter symbolic of his moral warriorhood
 Contrast — with Morton,Prince, Bee etc
 Irony — Bolo/Christ rejected for Morton/Barabas
 Symbolism — Christ analogy
 Any other appropriate technique
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
29
Question 10 cont’d
Ivan Morton
Ivan Morton’s power is totally destructive
Morton is an agent of colonial power that oppresses the people. He is 
mentally enslaved. Worshipping the white man’s power, he turns against 
his own people and in a sense, himself. 
 colonial education empowers Morton to rise above the circumstances 
that oppress other poor blacks
 ironically, his parents’ sacrifice helped to give him this power 
through which he betrays everything they stood for (abandoning his 
father’s unfinished house is symbolic) 
 he has power over the people as they believe in him and think he 
shares their dreams and aspirations
 Morton trades on his people’s belief in the power of education; he 
uses education to trick his people into believing he will help them
 their votes put him in power, whereupon he promptly betrays them by 
feathering his own nest (new cars etc)
 he shows his allegiance to white power and contempt of his people by 
moving out of the village and into the white backra’s house, 
dressing always in suit and tie, deserting Eulalie and marrying a 
light skinned wife who approximates the criteria for white beauty 
and femininity, etc
 although Morton is in power, he does nothing to repeal the law 
against free worship, and in fact the persecution increases
 he keeps the people bamboozled by giving a few handouts and doing a 
few useless favours, for example, writing recommendations for jobs 
they can’t get
 in the end Morton is able to succeed because the people refuse to 
act on their knowledge of his betrayal, refuse to follow Bolo, and 
give up Bolo for Morton. This leads to Bolo’s turning against his 
people and finally his tragic death
 through this character Lovelace shows the evils of colonialism, 
fear, etc
Any other reasonable answer
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
30
Question 10 cont’d 
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery - (descriptions of Morton’ clothes, his nose that is always 
in the air as if sniffing something better)
 Symbolism - his always standing sideways, using two victory signs 
instead of one, the Richardson house that he moves into — described 
as a tomb
 Contrast — between Morton and the other villagers, between Morton 
and Bolo
 Parallels (with Prince, Mitchell, the Catholic church)
 Irony
 Any other appropriate technique
Prince
Like Ivan Morton, Prince is an agent of colonial power that oppresses 
the people. He is mentally enslaved, worshipping the white man’s 
power, he turns against his own people and in a sense, himself. His 
power is destructive.
 However, Prince’s weapon is not colonial education but colonial 
brutality.
 Prince is a member of the constabulary and he uses his position 
to brutalize the people. While other policemen will warn the 
church when a raid is being planned or will turn a blind eye to 
their mode of worship so long as they don’t flaunt it too 
blatantly, Prince pursues them relentlessly as if it is a 
personal vendetta
 Prince seems to be a sycophant who wants to show his superiors 
that he is not like these ‘backward people’
 he doesn’t care about his people, only about promotion
 Prince seems to enjoy brutality for its own sake, as if he has 
some secret insecurity that is satisfied by this power over 
others
 He seems to think his position gives him absolute power, so he 
doesn’t even feel he should answer legitimate questions such as 
‘why are you arresting these people?’
 Bolo challenges him by trying to incite the people to kill him, 
and then by physically attacking him when he arrests his mother 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
31
and the other church members. Bolo shows that colonial power is 
not absolute
 The showdown between them shows that Prince by himself is not 
really strong; it is only when a lot of other policemen come and 
beat him up that Bolo is subdued. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
32
Question 10 cont’d
 The lack of human care by those in power is shown when the police 
throw Bolo in the jeep without caring if his head is damaged.
 Tragically, no one except Bolo dares to fight Prince—they are 
afraid of the power behind him. Their failure to fight leads to 
Bolo’s going to prison and later to Bolo’s downfall.
Any other reasonable point
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery – description of prince’s brutal physique
 Symbolism — description of prince’s brutal physique
 Contrast - with Bolo
 Parallels - (with Morton, Mitchell, the Catholic church)
 Any other appropriate technique
Irony — Prince turns against the people, mirrors the people turning 
against themselves
Irony — people turn to police against Bolo and destroy Bolo in the 
process
Irony — Bee’s son becomes a policeman because of their failure to 
‘kill Prince.’
Irony — police/the law acts illegally to make people unsafe yet their 
role should be to protect
Irony — Prince’s brutality shows not his strength but his weakness—
bully
Any other appropriate technique
Mitchell
Like Morton and Prince, Mitchell is an agent of colonial power that 
oppresses the people. He is mentally enslaved. Worshipping the white 
man’s power, he turns against his own people and in a sense, himself. 
His power is destructive
 Mitchell’s weapon of oppression is money. 
 Achieving business success by craft and corruption (examples)
 Like Prince’s, the contemptible nature of his power is exposed by 
Bolo, who terrorizes him, destroys his shop etc. 
 Bolo stands alone as the rest of the village while aware of 
Mitchell’s wickedness, do nothing about it
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
33
Question 10 cont’d 
 Bolo tries to fight against Mitchell’s corrupt power by showing 
the people how Mitchell is oppressing them. His badjohn behaviour 
smashing up Mitchell’s shop is meant to show them in a mirror how 
Mitchell is a badjohn oppressing them yet they do not recognize 
this lesson 
 Although Bolo is destroyed in the end, he succeeds in erasing 
Mitchell’s illegitimate gains. The end of the book also 
vindicates him as Eva acknowledges that he had been right about 
fighting against men like Mitchell.
 Through this character Lovelace shows the all - pervasive evil of 
colonialism, fear, etc
 Rather than through his allegiance to the church. 
 Any other reasonable answer
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery
 Irony
 Symbolism
 Contrast
 Parallels
 Any other appropriate technique
Any 4 points fully developed for the ONE character’s qualities 
and behaviour related to power, 4 marks each (16 marks)
Any 2 points fully developed for the author’s techniques in 
showing the character’s relation to power, 4 marks each (8 marks)
Reference to other themes OR for demonstrating knowledge that the 
character discussed is similar to other characters in the book
(1 mark)
 
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
34
Question 11
(a) Describe the central unfortunate situation in each story 
‘The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream’
Benjy’s unfortunate situation is the combination of his family’s 
poverty and his father’s attitude, and how these threaten his 
dream. Benjy has never seen or tasted ice-cream but his sister 
Elsa has described it to him in such magical terms that his 
life’s dream is to taste the ice cream sold by Mr Doran at the 
Harvest Festival Sale. This dream provides an important source of 
hope for Benjy, who is not particularly happy at home, mainly 
because his father does not always treat him well. This is 
because his father secretly thinks that his wife cheated on him 
and Benjy is not his. At last Benjy’s chance comes when the 
family attends the Harvest Sale. Benjy is full of excitement and 
terror, as he is not sure his father will be in a good enough 
mood to buy the ice cream Elsa has promised he will finally get 
to eat. And in fact for a while it seems that Benjy will get no 
ice cream, as his father is busy watching his mother to see which 
man she is talking to. Benjy is so distressed that he starts to 
cry, much to the disgust of his mother and sister whose 
impatience only makes him cry harder. At last his father, 
reassured that his wife isn’t clandestinely meeting any man after 
all, purchases ice cream for himself and the children. But there 
is a dreadful final twist. Just at the moment when Benjy, seized 
by fearful anticipation, tremblingly hesitates to taste his since 
cream, his father sees his mother talking to a well dressed town 
man, and in rage grabs Benjy and rushes towards his mother. 
Benjy’s ice cream falls to the ground, never to be retrieved. 
‘Mom Luby’
The I-narrator Elijah (along with his sister Puddin’) has lived 
with his grandmother Mom Luby for three years, since his mother 
died. His unfortunate situation is that he is at the mercy of 
his aunt’s questionably morals and engagement in illegal 
activities. He is subject to the wills and scheming of Mom Luby 
who seeks to milk the welfare system, bribe the police to protect 
her illegal dealings and expose the children to illegal and 
perhaps immoral influences in the process. Elijah is obviously 
very happy living with Mom Luby, but but after a while their 
financial situation gets so difficult that Mom Luby decides she 
has no choice but to seek State assistance. She takes the 
children to the State Aid office to put in her request, and 
shortly after, a social worker from the office arrives to assess 
whether Mom Luby is deserving of this aid. The supercilious, 
insensitive social worker is appalled by the family’s cultural 
habits and way of life (for example she scorns their food). 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
35
Question 11 cont’d
Mom Luby sharply and humorously responds to every rude criticism 
made by the social worker, who is increasingly discomfited. The
last straw is when she finds out that Mom Luby, the community’s 
‘matriarch’, who is not educated as she is, is ‘practising law, 
medicine, and the ministry without a licence.’ She decides to get 
her own back at Mom Lube by refusing to approve her for State
Aid. As a result, the reader is made aware, Elijah (and his 
sister) remain subject to the colourful but illicit activities of 
Mom Luby. 
4 marks each [8 marks]
b) Compare the writers’ strategies showing how each creates 
different reader response.
Possible points of comparison: 
 Senior’s narrative technique is heart-wrenching, Hunter’s 
hilarious. As a result we feel Benjy’s situation as a tragedy, 
and Elijah’s as a comedy — Elijah will survive; we are not sure 
about Benjy.
 Senior makes Benjy’s hunger for ice cream and the fact that his 
father may be a stumbling block to his getting this ice cream, 
central from the beginning, whereas Hunter makes Mom Luby’s 
feisty, hilarious personality central, so that we feel from the 
beginning that whatever the outcome, Elijah will be all right.
 Senior uses a carefully graduated series of images and events to 
build up the reader’s agony on Benjy’s behalf (for example, his 
terror is vividly described at every stage; and at several stages 
she outlines a possible threat to Benjy’s dream of ice cream) 
while Hunter has the reader laughing throughout as Mom Luby takes 
control of the situation (for example, at the very beginning she 
tells the children to shut their mouths — ‘don’t mess up my lie’
— when she tells the Welfare people she is their mother. At first 
we are worried that she might be a shady character, and she is. 
She is a street-wise character who attempts to exploit the 
weakness in the social system and we even applaud her for that, 
but Hunter also reveals Mom Luby’s consistent trait of resistance 
to the legal mores and requirements of the society.
 Benjy’s story is told from the point of view of a sympathetic 
third person narrator who feels his suffering and relays it to 
the reader as if from inside Benjy’s head. Elijah is his own I￾narrator who tells the story as an observer of Mom Luby’s 
indomitable self-possession and feisty strategies of survival. He 
never expresses any feelings of fear, so we know he is not 
concerned about whether he has shoes or carfare for school — the 
great Mom Luby will take care of it all. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
36
Question 11 cont’d
 Benjy’s story ends with a stream of consciousness (all his 
thoughts running together without full stops or other 
punctuation) to show his distress, whereas Elijah’s ends with Mom 
Luby gambling/playing a card game and laughing (showing her 
contempt for the social worker’s view that she is bringing up the 
children in an unhealthy atmosphere
 Any other reasonable point of comparison. Answer MUST show the 
contrast between the tragic vision in Senior’s story and the 
comic vision in Hunter’s story. 
2 comparisons fully developed, 2 marks each
Explicit comparison
(8 marks)
(1 mark)
[9 marks]
(c) Which ending do you prefer and why? 
To gain full marks, the answer must focus on the endings. It must 
state the candidate’s preference, which can either be one ending 
over the other, or equal satisfaction/dissatisfaction with both 
endings. The candidate must give clear reasons for this response, 
based on comments about either the writer’s technique; or the 
‘vision’/perspective (on life, on the child’s situation etc) that 
the ending encourages. 
[8 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 12
Choose two short stories you have studied and discuss how the MAIN 
character in each deals with a challenging situation. 
The essay encourages candidates to cover the following:
 Select two appropriate stories, correctly identifying the main 
characters.
 Provide a description of the challenging situation.
 Show how the character deals with the situation, and what this tell 
us about him or her
 Discuss the strategies/techniques used by the writers to bring 
across the challenges
 Suggest some theme that the writer invites us to think about.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
37
Question 12 cont’d
Identifying and Describing the Challenging Situation 
Some stories present challenging situations on a personal level, as in 
“The Man of the House” where the young boy has to take care of his 
sick mother. 
Sometimes the personal may cover challenges such as confronting our 
own inner fears, problems, and prejudices as in “Blackout.” Here a 
white woman is approached by a black man as she waits in the dark at a 
bus stop. 
What might appear to be challenges to child might not be the case with 
an adult. In “The Day the World almost came to an End,” the child’s 
fertile imagination conjures images of the end of the world. Her 
hysterical reaction to an airplane flying overhead is humorous in its 
presentation. 
Often challenging situations exist in everyday life and play out in 
the larger political arena. “Berry” explores the sinister issue of 
racism, exploitation and prejudices. 
Other Points to consider
 Who is facing this challenging situation (is it a child, an adult, a 
male, female) and where this is occurring.
 What caused the challenging situation (is this of the character’s 
doing, some outside force)?
 How is the problem resolved?
How the Writer Brings Across the Challenging Situation
This kind of essay requires the identification and use of techniques 
used by the writers to get the message across. The challenging 
situations therefore, can be portrayed through the narrative 
perspective, symbols, figurative language, suspense, setting, 
flashback etc.
Story, 12 marks each (24 marks)
Comparison, 1 mark (1 mark)
TOTAL 25 marks
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2004, the second year of a new cycle (2003 - 2005), the overall examination performance was quite
consistent with that of 2003. Mark allocations were again indicated for the various parts of each question.
This helped candidates to manage their time more efficiently.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with texts and understanding of them, and
displayed a satisfactory grasp of the mechanics of writing. Still, avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and
punctuation are far too common across the board. Teachers and candidates need to be reminded that
there is no such word as “alot” in standard English; and that “all right” is the standard form of the phrase;
and that "its" is the possessive form of the pronoun (Every dog must have its day); and that “it's” is an
abbreviated form of “it is.”
Some candidates demonstrated a commendable ability to organize ideas into logical, well-argued paragraphs;
to frame their essays effectively with an introduction and conclusion; and to effect a smooth transition
from quotation to discussion. Too many, however, made little effort to structure their responses. It must
be emphasized that while the candidate is not penalized for sectionalizing responses, more marks are
given for a well-developed essay.
While most candidates performed very well in segments of questions requiring recall, most were not as
competent in analysing texts. Questions that asked for a discussion of the dramatic significance, or for
comments on poetic devices, for instance, tended to be poorly done.
Candidates need to be taught how to read examination questions carefully, and to respond fully or briefly,
as instructed, to all parts. Their attention should be drawn to the meaning of instructional words used in
the examination such as “Comment on,” “Describe,” “Identify,” “Compare,” and “Discuss.” These all require
different responses, and “briefly” means just what it says. They should know, too, that proper names
should ideally be correctly spelt, and the titles of works underlined.
Far too many candidates still disregard the caution that the same text is not to be used to respond to more
than one question, and many continue to use texts that are not on the syllabus. Candidates should be
reminded that they will be penalized for not observing these instructions.
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 8 of the syllabus:
1. Knowledge and Insight (Profile 1)
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of illustration
(c) Quality/Clarity of argument
2. Organizing of Response (Profile 2)
(a) Organizing (Structure and development of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs)
(b) Grammar and mechanics of writing (Sentence structure, punctuation, spelling, diction, etc.)
- 3 -
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
Section A tests
(a) description, analysis (that is, the ability to break down and select relevant data), and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form, information drawn from various sections of the
text), for the purpose of answering a particular question.
(b) the ability to support an argument based on reference to the text, a response to or opinion about a
play, novel, short story.
(c) an elementary awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, of the writer as a person who employs various
techniques in the shaping of the language and the presentation of human character and behaviour).
(d) an ability to recognize and distinguish between qualities of feeling as presented in a particular test.
(e) a grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
Section B tests
(a) the same skills as indicated for Section A. However, because of its focus on themes and the comparison
of texts, Section B requires an equal measure of analysis but a greater effort at synthesis to answer
questions adequately.
(b) an appreciation of the social content and context of literature.
Skills and Aptitude Tested in Paper 02
This paper tests
(a) comprehension.
(b) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet/dramatist achieves his
effect).
These skills require
(a) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function
in the passage.
(b) attention to dramatic devices, for example, stage direction and “props”.
(c) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
(d) awareness of the interaction among characters.
- 4 -
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01
Section A – Set Texts – Questions 1 - 14
ROMEO AND JULIET
Question 1
This question required an understanding of a crucial moment in the dramatic action – the Capulet feast.
Candidates needed to know the facts surrounding Romeo’s presence at the feast of his father’s sworn
enemy, what transpires at the feast, and the dramatic significance of the scene.
This was the most popular question of the entire examination attracting responses from 55 per cent of
candidates. Many candidates answered (a) and (b) satisfactorily – although far too many confused Mercutio
with Benvolio – but lost marks in (c), which required them to say why this scene was dramatically significant.
Teachers and candidates are reminded that questions on Drama will, in one way or the another, test
knowledge of dramatic significance.
Question 2
This question required an understanding of what is arguably the most memorable scene in the play.
Surprisingly only 8.2 per cent responded. Many candidates responded well to (a) and (b); but lost marks
in (c), which tested their knowledge of dramatic significance.
Romeo and Juliet proved a popular choice (the second most popular text) and, hence, an appropriate text.
However, there was quite a bit of film interference. Teachers and candidates are reminded that neither
video nor film ought to replace the text, on which questions are set.
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ knowledge of the final scene of the play in which the three most
important couples are present. It involved identification, description of the test that Petruchio suggests,
and the importance of Katherina’s closing speech.
Nine per cent of the candidates answered this question and many gained full marks in (a) and (b), but lost
marks in (c), which asked them to place Katherina’s speech within the context of the entire comedy. There
was, however, one perfect score on this question.
Question 4
As in the previous question, this one required candidates to know and understand a particular scene – the
wedding day (Act 3, Scene 2). Candidates were asked to respond to Katherina’s humiliation and anxiety
at Petruchio’s deliberate late arrival, to describe the choreographed appearance of a fantastically dressed
Petruchio, riding the most lamentable nag/jade, and to comment on the hero’s outrageous behaviour.
Only three per cent of the candidates attempted this question and there was no perfect score.
The Taming of the Shrew was not a popular text with candidates and teachers. This is not surprising,
since it hardly works as text in 2004. Only the most skilful actors can pull it off on stage.
- 5 -
SAINT JOAN
Question 5
This question required candidates to respond to Dunois’s initial appearance on stage. It expresses Dunois’s
love of art/poetry and his relationship with the heroine.
Only 2 per cent of the candidates chose this question and there was no perfect score. Most candidates did
not respond well to part (c).
Question 6
This question tested candidates’ understanding of events associated with the introduction of the Inquisition.
As was the case in 2003, Question 6 was again the least popular question of the examination. A mere 1.5
per cent of candidates chose it, and no candidate was able to score full marks.
Saint Joan was the least popular set book.
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
Question 7
Thirty-seven per cent of the candidates chose this question, which centered on the relationship between
the children and Boo Radley, and the majority of scores were between 16 and 21. Candidates generally
responded well to (a) and (b), but lost marks in (c). A number of candidates earned full marks in this
question.
Question 8
This straightforward question, which focused on Atticus’ character and the repercussions of his defence of
Tom Robinson, elicited the best overall performance from candidates. Twenty-seven responses earned a
perfect score, and the majority of scores were between 16 and 24.
To Kill a Mockingbird proved in the second year of this cycle to be the most popular set text. Its simple,
straightforward, linear narrative proved irresistible to 73 per cent of the candidates.
WIDE SARGASSO SEA
Question 9
This question on how Antoinette and her husband respond to Dominica elicited responses from eight per
cent of the candidates and there were many excellent responses, several of which earned perfect scores.
Candidates performed well in part (a) and (b) but experienced difficulty in explaining what the reaction of
Antoinette and her husband to Dominica tells the reader about the couple’s relationship.
Question 10
This question was more popular than its counterpart, and attracted responses from almost 13 per cent of
the candidates. Sections (a) and (b) were well handled, but (c) posed problems, no doubt because it required
a synthesis of knowledge and interpretation.
With 20 per cent of the candidates choosing Wide Sargasso Sea, it became the third least popular set text.
It is not an easy text at this level.
- 6 -
A WORLD OF PROSE
Questions 11 and 12
Question 11 was a popular question based on “The Two Grandmothers” and it was attempted by 33 per
cent of the candidates. There were many excellent answers and a number of candidates earned perfect
scores.
Question 12 on “Down Our Way” was much less popular than its counterpart. Both Questions 11 and 12
required a knowledge of only one short story, and this no doubt contributed to the quality of responses, as
candidates were able to cope well with the requirements.
Questions 11 and 12 elicited responses from 42 per cent of the candidates, and A World of Prose continues
to be an attractive option in Section A.
A WORLD OF POETRY
Questions 13 and 14
In Question 13, most candidates responded well to parts (a) and (b) but had difficulty responding to part
(c), the significance of the persona/speaker. In Question 14, (a) and (c) posed problems for many candidates.
There was only one perfect score among the responses to these questions.
Approximately 20 per cent of the candidates chose to answer Questions 13 and 14, 11 per cent less than in
2003. Happily, A World of Poetry continues to hold its own among set texts.
Section B – Themes – Questions 15 - 21
Question 15 – Love and Family Relationships
About 29 per cent of the candidates answered Question 15, and there were a fair number of very good
responses. Candidates handled (a) more comfortably than (b). Surprisingly there was only one perfect
score among the 5 243 responses. Choice of texts either positively or adversely affected performance.
Repetition of texts was the downfall of many candidates.
Question 16 – Freedom
Out of the 4 020 candidates who chose to respond to Question 16, approximately 25 per cent scored more
than 18 marks. While part (a) posed no real problems, part (b) proved a stiff challenge to candidates who
were less comfortable with comparison than with description, as required in part (a). There were two
perfect scores.
Question 17 – Heroism
Heroism perennially has been the most popular theme question. This year it proved to be the second most
popular question of the entire examination, attracting responses from 39 per cent of the candidates.
Candidates generally responded intelligently, but many had difficulty with (b), which demanded an
illustration of the effect of heroism on a major character. Scores of 18 marks and over were gained by 22
per cent of the candidates. There were four perfect scores among 6 938 responses.
Question 18 – Power and Authority
This question elicited responses from 22 per cent of the candidates, only one of whom provided a perfect
answer. Only 9.2 per cent of the candidates scored 18 or more.
- 7 -
Question 19 – Dreams and Aspirations
This question fell in popularity from 2003; only 28 per cent of candidates attempted it in 2004 compared
with 40 per cent in the previous year. It, however, was well handled, and recorded the highest percentage
of scores above 18 among the theme questions.
Question 20 – Women in Society
This question fell dramatically in popularity in 2004, in comparison to 2003. This is surprising in this age
of feminism, liberation and the fact that the question encouraged candidates to demonstrate their
understanding of how and why a female character triumphs in two of the texts studied. This question
recorded the worst performance in the entire examination!
Question 21 – Attitudes to the Past
This question proved to be the second least popular theme question behind Question 20, and was attempted
by seven per cent of the candidates. Only one candidate achieved a perfect score and as in previous years,
(c) gave candidates the most difficulty.
The theme questions (15-21) should prove to be easier than Section A questions, since both themes and
texts are known far in advance of the examination. It is difficult to understand why candidates do not
perform better on these questions. While it is not wise or educational for teachers to encourage candidates
to prepare full answers and regurgitate them on examination day, there is nothing to prevent teachers
from ensuring that candidates know precisely how to structure an essay on a theme question. The present
examination encourages and invites teachers and candidates to explore options. Since nothing is compulsory
on the examination, candidates may choose as many as three questions from Section A. With theme and
text(s) known, there is hardly an excuse for inadequate preparation. While teachers cannot vouch for
candidates' familiarity with texts, they can and perhaps ought to provide model answers. There are, of
course, inherent dangers in such a practice, but the advantages are likely to outweigh the disadvantages.
At least candidates can be guided to correlate theme and text(s), since this is so often the key to the quality
of response.
General
As mentioned on page 2, overall performance in 2004 remained stable. The drop in performance in Paper
02 was counterbalanced by an improved performance in Paper 01. Though no candidate wrote a perfect
answer for either Question 1 or Question 2, 9.08 per cent of those answering Question 1 and 13.2 per cent
of those answering Question 2, scored 16 or more.
In the questions on drama, teachers and candidates are reminded that "dramatic importance" is crucial to
any proper appreciation of drama. It is really about structure and discovering what a particular scene is
doing in its desired place and how this placement affects the play. At this level, the emphasis is more on
particular scenes than on the entire play. Beginnings, middles, and endings are always crucial to drama,
poetry, and prose fiction, and questions will reflect the truth of this observation.
Teachers are to be reminded that we are surely moving to an approach to literature that understands the
three modes as related yet distinct. Questions will reflect in one way or another the need to appreciate
how poetry functions as poetry and drama as drama. Questions on novels will reflect the need to understand
the organic relationship between character, theme, setting and language.
Reading prose, drama, and especially poetry, aloud with sensitivity can go a long way towards appreciating
literature. It can make the difference between merely responding to it and understanding how it works.
- 8 -
Paper 02
General Comments
In 2004, against the norm, there were more responses to the poem (Question 2) than to the prose excerpt
(Question 1): 9 294 candidates chose Question 2, while 7 875 candidates responded to Question 1.
Performance on Question 2 was marginally better than on Question 1.
There was no perfect total score in Paper 02, but there was a score of 28 in both questions. Thirteen per
cent of the candidates scored 16 or higher.
Both passages required an understanding of how writers use language to describe and explore the world
of ideas and emotions through imaginative structures.
Although the prose excerpt fictionalized Trinidadian/Caribbean history, both questions demanded of
candidates an understanding of Standard English.
Candidates who were adept at applying this knowledge performed best.
More attention needs to be paid to identification and explanation of figures of speech. Candidates were
able to recognize similes and metaphors, however few recognized examples of puns and paradoxes.
Moreover, while candidates were able to identify the figure of speech, in many instances they were unable
to explain how the figure of speech worked in the given context. This area of weakness is one we would
like to see improve.
There is still a tendency to extrapolate when responding to a critical piece and candidates need to be
reminded that they should confine themselves to responding to the given stimuli, rather than drawing
from extra-textual sources. In using the question as a platform to preach, some candidates became
sidetracked into irrelevance.
- 9 -
1 9451 55 24.73 8
Romeo and Juliet
2 1409 8.21 21.29 9 3 1615 9.41 22.86 1
Taming of the Shrew
4 508 2.96 12.40 0 5 301 1.75 5.65 0
St. Joan
6 254 1.48 12.6 0 7 6415 37.38 47.78 11
To Kill a Mockingbird
8 6598 38.45 59.23 27
9 1330 7.75 44.75 16
Wide Sargasso Sea
10 2186 12.73 35.68 3
11 5740 33.45 24.75 12
World of Prose
12 1439 8.38 30.37 0
13 830 4.83 9.53 1
World of Poetry
14 2561 14.92 19.76 0
THEMES
15 Love and 5243 30.55 12.13 1
Family Relationships
16 Freedom 4020 23.42 24.74 2
17 Heroism 6942 40.45 21.61 4
18 Power and Authority 3544 20.65 9.2 1
19 Dreams and Aspirations 4841 28.21 37.38 5
20 Women in Society 981 5.71 4.79 0
21 Attitude to the Past 1276 7.43 12 1
APPENDIX - 1
Question # Text/Theme No. of Percentage Pecentage No. of
Responses of Candidates Scores of 18+ Perfect Scores
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2005 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
-2-
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2005, the third and final year of this cycle (2003 - 2005), the overall examination performance was quite
consistent with that of 2004. Mark allocations were again indicated for the various parts of each question. This
helped candidates to manage their time more efficiently.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with texts and understanding of them, and displayed
a satisfactory grasp of the mechanics of writing. Still, avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation are
far too common across the board. Teachers and candidates need to be reminded that there is no such word as
“alot” in standard English; and that “all right” is the standard form of the phrase; and that "its" is the possessive
form of the pronoun (Every dog must have its day); and that “it's” is an abbreviated form of “it is.”
Some candidates demonstrated a commendable ability to organize ideas into logical, well-argued paragraphs; to
frame their essays effectively with an introduction and conclusion; and to effect a smooth transition from
quotation to discussion. Too many, however, made little effort to structure their responses. It must be emphasized
that while the candidate is not penalized for sectionalizing responses, more marks are given for a well-developed
essay.
While most candidates performed very well in segments of questions requiring recall, most were not as competent
in analysing texts. Questions that asked for a discussion of the dramatic significance, or for comments on poetic
devices, for instance, tended to be poorly done.
Candidates need to be taught how to read examination questions carefully, and to respond fully or briefly, as
instructed, to all parts. Their attention should be drawn to the meaning of instructional words used in the
examination such as “Comment on,” “Describe,” “Identify,” “Compare,” and “Discuss.” These all require
different responses, and “briefly” means just what it says. They should know, too, that proper names should
ideally be correctly spelt, and the titles of works underlined.
Far too many candidates still disregard the caution that the same text is not to be used to respond to more than
one question, and many continue to use texts that are not on the syllabus. Candidates should be reminded that
they will be penalized for not observing these instructions.
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 8 of the syllabus:
1. Knowledge and Insight (Profile 1)
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of illustration
(c) Quality/Clarity of argument
2. Organizing of Response (Profile 2)
(a) Organizing (Structure and development of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs)
(b) Grammar and mechanics of writing (Sentence structure, punctuation, spelling, diction, etc.)
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
Section A tests
(a) description, analysis (that is, the ability to break down and select relevant data), and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form, information drawn from various sections of the
text), for the purpose of answering a particular question.
-3-
(b) the ability to support an argument based on reference to the text, a response to or opinion about a play,
novel, short story.
(c) an elementary awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, of the writer as a person who employs various
techniques in the shaping of the language and the presentation of human character and behaviour).
(d) an ability to recognize and distinguish between qualities of feeling as presented in a particular test.
(e) a grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
Section B tests
(a) the same skills as indicated for Section A. However, because of its focus on themes and the comparison
of texts, Section B requires an equal measure of analysis but a greater effort at synthesis to answer
questions adequately.
(b) an appreciation of the social content and context of literature.
Skills and Aptitude Tested in Paper 02
This paper tests
(a) comprehension.
(b) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet/dramatist achieves his effect).
These skills require
(a) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function in
the passage.
(b) attention to dramatic devices, for example, stage direction and “props”.
(c) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
(d) awareness of the interaction among characters.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01
Section A – Set Texts – Questions 1 - 14
ROMEO AND JULIET
Question 1
This question required an understanding of a crucial moment that turns around the drama. Candidates were
required to know why Romeo flees to Mantua. Most recalled correctly the fatal duel between Tybalt and
Mercutio, in which Mercutio is killed. Many stated accurately that Romeo feels responsible through his interference
for his friend’s death. Very few remembered that it was Friar Laurence who suggested to Romeo that he go to
Mantua.
Section (b) elicited a few detailed responses, but in the main responses were too generalized.
The vast majority of responses to (c) omitted the Friar’s advice and counsel to Romeo. Everyone mentioned the
potion (called “portion” and “position”) and its effects. Too many, however, gave information beyond the plan.
Question 2
This question required an understanding of the opening scene of the play. This question was generally well
handled; (a) and (b) gave little trouble. Section (c), however, indicated how badly prepared candidates are for
-4-
a question on dramatic significance. Only 8.19 per cent of candidates attempted this question.
Romeo and Juliet proved a popular choice (the second most popular text) and, hence, an appropriate text.
However, there was quite a bit of film interference. Teachers and candidates are reminded that neither video
nor film ought to replace the text, on which questions are set.
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ knowledge of Act 1, Scene 1 of The Taming of the Shrew. Sections (a) and
(b) were well handled by most, but (c) proved difficult to many. Only 6.30 per cent of candidates chose
Question 3.
Question 4
This question required an understanding of the most eagerly awaited moment in The Taming of the Shrew: the
initial meeting between Petruchio and Katherina. Sections (a) and (b) were generally competently handled, but
(c) proved to be the most difficult section of the question. Again, responses evinced how badly prepared
candidates are for questions on dramatic significance. Only 7.80 per cent of candidates chose Question 4.
The Taming of the Shrew was not a popular text with candidates and teachers. This is not surprising, since it
hardly works as text in 2005. Only the most skilful actors can pull it off on stage.
SAINT JOAN
Question 5
This straightforward question tested the candidates’ knowledge of the relationship between Joan and three (3)
other major characters. Neither (a) nor (b) posed any problems for the majority of candidates.
Question 6
This was a more problematic question for candidates. Like its counterpart, it required a knowledge of the
relationship between Joan and three (3) major characters. While (a) posed few problems, (b) was not well
done.
Saint Joan was in 2005, as it was in 2004, the least popular set book.
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
Question 7
This question was reasonably well done by the majority of candidates. Only Miss Maudie’s criticisms posed any
problems.
Question 8
This question was more popular than Question 7 and was well done by the majority of candidates. Candidates
were well prepared for (a), (b) and (c).
-5-
To Kill a Mockingbird proved in the second year of this cycle to be the most popular set text. Its simple,
straightforward, linear narrative proved irresistible to 77.10 per cent of the candidates.
WIDE SARGASSO SEA
Question 9
This question required a knowledge of a particular moment at the end of the novel. While (a) was generally well
handled, (b) posed some difficulties for candidates. Only 8.18 per cent of candidates answered Question 9.
Question 10
Question 10 was more difficult than Question 9 in that it required a knowledge of the role of two women in
Antoinette’s life. Many more candidates chose Question 10 than Question 9, and the majority of candidates did
both (a) and (b) reasonably well. Approximately 15 per cent of candidates chose Question 10.
A WORLD OF PROSE
Question 11
Although Question 11 required a knowledge of only one short story, (b) and (c) proved to be difficult for the
majority of candidates. Both Sections (a) and (b) demanded an understanding of point of view and the significance
of Hughes’ choice of different points of view.
Question 12
Question 12 was better handled than was Question 11 by the majority of candidates. Sections (a) and (b) were
straightforward, but (c) proved difficult for many. Few candidates went beyond the obvious.
Questions 11 and 12 elicited responses from 37 per cent of the candidates, and AWorld of Prose continues to be
an attractive option in Section A.
A WORLD OF POETRY
Questions 13 and 14
Neither Question 13 nor Question 14 was well handled by the majority of candidates. Sections (b) and (c)
proved problematic to many candidates as did (c) in Question 14. However, at least 8 candidates scored full
marks in Question 13 and Question 14.
Happily, AWorld of Poetry continues to hold its own among set texts.
Section B – Themes – Questions 15 - 21
Question 15 – Love and Family Relationships
About 29 per cent of the candidates answered Question 15, and there were a fair number of very good responses.
Candidates handled (a) more comfortably than (b). Choice of texts either positively or adversely affected
performance. Repetition of texts was the downfall of many candidates.
Question 16 – Freedom
Out of the 3 140 candidates who chose to respond to Question 16, approximately 60 per cent scored more than
15 marks. While part (a) posed no real problems, part (b) proved a stiff challenge to candidates who were less
comfortable with comparison than with description, as required in part (a). There were at least 4 perfect
scores.
Question 17 – Heroism
Heroism perennially has been the most popular theme question. This year it proved to be the second most
popular theme question attracting responses from 36 per cent of the candidates.
-6-
Candidates showed a fairly good grasp of both types of heroism, although some chose to show how the same
kind of heroism is illustrated in both texts. Thirty two per cent of candidates scored 15 or higher, and at least 2
candidates scored 29.
Question 18 – Power and Authority
This question elicited responses from 13 per cent of the candidates, only two of whom scored 28, the highest
mark. Thirty three per cent of the candidates scored 15 or more.
Question 19 – Dreams and Aspirations
This question rose in popularity from 2004 to become the most popular theme question. Approximately 46 per
cent of candidates responded to Question 19. Over 60 per cent scored 15 or more, and there were 6 perfect
scores.
Question 20 – Women in Society
This question fell in popularity in 2005. This is surprising in this age of feminism, liberation and the fact that the
question encouraged candidates to demonstrate their understanding of how and why a female character exerts
influence in two of the texts studied. There was at least one perfect score, and 39 per cent of candidates scored
15 or more.
Question 21 – Attitudes to the Past
This question, in the past, has always been unpopular. Again in 2005, Question 21 was the least popular theme
question. Although there were scores of 29, there was not a perfect score.
The theme questions (15-21) should prove to be easier than Section A questions, since both themes and texts are
known far in advance of the examination. It is difficult to understand why candidates do not perform better on
these questions. While it is not wise or educational for teachers to encourage candidates to prepare full answers
and regurgitate them on examination day, there is nothing to prevent teachers from ensuring that candidates
know precisely how to structure an essay on a theme question. The present examination encourages and invites
teachers and candidates to explore options. Since nothing is compulsory on the examination, candidates may
choose as many as three questions from Section A. With theme and text(s) known, there is hardly an excuse for
inadequate preparation. While teachers cannot vouch for candidates' familiarity with texts, they can and perhaps
ought to provide model answers. There are, of course, inherent dangers in such a practice, but the advantages
are likely to outweigh the disadvantages. At least candidates can be guided to correlate theme and text(s), since
this is so often the key to the quality of response.
General
As mentioned on page 2, overall performance in 2005 remained stable. The drop in performance in Paper 02
was counterbalanced by an improved performance in Paper 01. Though no candidate wrote a perfect answer
for either Question 1 or Question 2, 9.08 per cent of those answering Question 1 and 13.2 per cent of those
answering Question 2, scored 16 or more.
In the questions on drama, teachers and candidates are reminded that "dramatic importance" is crucial to any
proper appreciation of drama. It is really about structure and discovering what a particular scene is doing in its
desired place and how this placement affects the play. At this level, the emphasis is more on particular scenes
than on the entire play. Beginnings, middles, and endings are always crucial to drama, poetry, and prose fiction,
and questions will reflect the truth of this observation.
Teachers are to be reminded that we are surely moving to an approach to literature that understands the three
modes as related yet distinct. Questions will reflect in one way or another the need to appreciate how poetry
functions as poetry and drama as drama. Questions on novels will reflect the need to understand the organic
relationship between character, theme, setting and language.
-7-
Reading prose, drama, and especially poetry aloud with sensitivity can take one a long way towards appreciating
literature. It can make the difference between merely responding to it and understanding how it works.
Paper 02
General Comments
In 2005, there were more responses to the prose extract (Question 2) than to the poem (Question 1): 12 432
candidates chose Question 2, while 6 841 candidates responded to Question 1. It was surprising that so many
candidates chose what proved to be the more difficult question.
Six candidates got a perfect score on Question 1, while only one received a perfect score on Question 2.
Both passages required an understanding of how writers use language to describe and explore the world of
ideas and emotions through imaginative structures.
More attention needs to be paid to identification and explanation of figures of speech. Candidates were able to
recognize similes and metaphors; however, few recognized examples of puns and paradoxes. Moreover, while
candidates were able to identify the figure of speech, in many instances they were unable to explain how the
figure of speech worked in the given context. This area of weakness is one in which the examiners would like
to see an improvement.
There is still a tendency to extrapolate when responding to a critical piece and candidates need to be reminded
that they should confine themselves to responding to the given stimuli, rather than drawing from extra-textual
sources. In using the question as a platform to preach, some candidates became sidetracked into irrelevance.
-8-
APPENDIX – 1
Question # Text/Theme No. of Percentage
Responses of Candidates
1 7418 61.8
Romeo and Juliet
2 983 8.19
3 757 6.30
Taming of the Shrew 4 936 7.80
5 162 1.35
St. Joan
6 174 1.45
7 3453 28.70
To Kill a Mockingbird 8 5688 47.40
9 982 8.18
Wide Sargasso Sea 10 1760 14.60
11 2619 14.80
World of Prose
12 2619 21.80
13 788 6.50
World of Poetry 14 1086 9.05
THEMES
15 Love and 2280 19.00
Family Relationships
16 Freedom 3140 26.10
17 Heroism 4365 36.30
18 Power and Authority 1573 13.10
19 Dreams and Aspirations 6416 53.40
20 Women in Society 1193 9.90
21 Attitude to the Past 1052 8.70
N.B. Numbers and percentages are based on 70% of candidate population.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2006
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2006 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2006
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2006, the first year of the first cycle of the new syllabus (2006-2008) the overall examination performance
declined from that of 2005. In 2006 44.65 per cent of candidates achieved Grades III and above compared
with 58.93 per cent in 2005. Mark allocations were indicated for the various parts of the questions on drama
and on poetry. Mark allocations were not indicated for the prose questions, so students faced an additional
challenge here of structuring the essay without guidance.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with the texts, and there was evidence of an
increased personal involvement with the material and an emotional response to the conflicts and struggles
being discussed. Avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation were still too frequent. Teachers
should ensure that students can spell words that they will inevitably need when writing on a specific text:
Macbeth, for instance, stole the throne (not thrown), he was a valiant soldier (not “solider”) and he was misled
by the witches’ prophecies (not “profisies”) or some such variant). The spelling of proper names should be
mastered before the examination, and titles of texts should be underlined.
Some candidates demonstrated excellent ability in organising their responses into logical, well-developed
paragraphs and used smooth transitions to form those paragraphs into a well-crafted essay, complete with an
introduction and a conclusion. They were able to introduce relevant quotations and move from quotation to
discussion. Too many candidates, though, wrote sectionalised responses to the different parts of the question
(sometimes even on separate pages) instead of using the question breakdown to shape their responses into
a flowing essay.
Again this year, parts of questions that required simple recall were generally done well, but weaker candidates
were not so competent when called on to analyse situations. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic
devices or poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the “story”.
Since this new syllabus is genre-based, it is important for teachers to guide students to examine dramatic and
poetic devices and to be able to discuss their effectiveness. A large number of students simply omitted the part
of the question requiring comments on dramatic or poetic devices. Candidates need to be reminded of the
importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in the prose fiction section where there is no
sectionalising to prompt them. Words such as “Comment on”, “Identify”, “Discuss”, “Compare” require different
responses, and candidates must be taught how to answer such questions.
Teachers should discuss with students the importance of care in selecting their questions. This year many
candidates opted to do questions for which they were unprepared—particularly in the prose fiction section of
the paper. The question which dealt with a schooldays experience, for instance, was not suitable if the candidate
was prepared to write only on The Pearl and Green Days by the River. Students also need to be taught, to focus
on the specific requirements of the question and answer each part as thoroughly as possible with supporting
evidence from the text—not to narrate the story, and not to write everything they know whether relevant or not.
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. Quite a large number of
candidates wrote on both of the plays, wasting time and losing marks in the process.
- 3 -
The following table shows a breakdown of the candidates’ choices.
APPENDIX - 1
No Percentage
 Question # Text of Responses of Candidates
Drama 1 Macbeth 8161 42.3
 2 5917 30.7
 3 Glass Menagerie 1523 7.9
 4 3714 19.2
Poetry 5 World of Poetry 16246 84.2
 6 2761 14.3
Prose 7 9525 49.4
 8 * 6420 33.3
 9 1271 6.6
10 1841 9.5
* Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for comparison from
the following:
West Indian
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony
Non West Indian
A Separate Peace John Knowles
The Pearl John Steinbeck
Intention of Questions
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus:
Understanding
Knowledge of Text and Insight
i) Relevance and adequacy of content
ii) Relevance and accuracy of examples
Expression
Organisation of Response
i) Structure and development of responses
ii) Clear and logical argument
- 4 -
Quality of Language
i) Clarity and appropriateness of expression used
ii) Mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling)
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
This paper tests
i) comprehension
ii) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
These skills require
i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function
effectively in the passage.
ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and “props”.
iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
iv) awareness of the interaction among characters.
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus)
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts
explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living.
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question).
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism.
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses.
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested throughout
the examination and most particularly in Paper 02.
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text.
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
General Comments on Student Performance in Paper 01
Because this new syllabus is genre-specific, it will be necessary for teachers to devote more time to dealing
with poetic and dramatic devices, and to look more closely at the strategies used by prose writers—setting,
characterization, dialogue, and so on. Students have to be sensitised to the undercurrents of mood, conflict and
irony in drama, and need to understand how the stage directions function. In poetry, they need to be enabled to
recognise when metaphoric language is being used, and not insist on a literal reading.
- 5 -
A few candidates attempted to write in essay format in Paper 1. Students need to be advised that each answer
should be written on a separate line. In addition, each genre should start on a new page.
Question 1: Drama
Most candidates responded with compassion to the situation of Annie and Carlton. Many candidates did not
understand that Annie wanted a job, but went for limited responses: she needed bread, money or a place to
stay. In responding to Question (c) about Jean’s entrance, many candidates confused entrance with presence,
and commented on the effect on Annie of Jean’s entrance instead of the change of mood that would affect the
audience. Few candidates gained full marks on Question (d) which required them to examine the words “gentle
irony” (i.e. both gentle and ironic), and some students did not know the meaning of “radiant” and so had
difficulty with Question (e). For Question (f) few candidates saw the contrast between Carlton and Jean (e.g.
class) and some did not understand the word “impact.” A few candidates gained full marks for this last question.
Question 2: Poetry
Question (a), many candidates kept to the literal level, not seeing the sleep/death metaphor in the poem.
Others, misreading the poem in another way, maintained that the forest imagery was the literal meaning of the
poem, and for Question (e) they discussed “process” using terms like deforestation, evaporation, condensation
and photosynthesis. This tendency to hold on to a perceived literal meaning proved the downfall of many
candidates.
Question 3: Prose
Candidates evidently found this passage exciting, and responses for the most part were satisfactory. Many,
though, did not realise that Jonathan was a seagull. Many did not understand the phrase “terminal velocity”
Question (c), and many could not identify examples of poetic language in the passage or explain what was
poetic about those examples.
Paper 02
Section A – Drama – Questions 1 - 4
MACBETH
Too many candidates attempted questions on both of the plays. Only one question must be selected from
this section.
Question 1
This question required an understanding of Macbeth’s guilty fears and his ambitious desires after the killing of
Duncan. It also required an understanding of irony as a literary device, and invited the candidate to link
Macbeth’s illicit rise to power with his tragic downfall, so tracing the justice implicit in the unfolding of
events. The section on irony proved difficult for some candidates, and weaker ones tended to provide vague
comments on the topic of justice, not providing specific supporting evidence from the play.
Question 2
This question focused on Macduff’s motive for revenge and his role in Macbeth’s downfall. Many candidates
ignored the words “at that time”, and wrote about Macbeth’s fears of Macduff later in the play. Section (b) was
generally adequately done, but section (c) proved challenging. Candidates were sometimes not able to distinguish
between Macduff’s role and his suitability as an avenger. Most dealt well with the rallying of forces against the
tyrant and with Macduff’s personal revenge; only the better students understood that Macduff, since he himself
was not going to be king, was God’s righteous tool in delivering Scotland from the usurper.
- 6 -
Candidates were almost unanimous in describing Macduff as having been born by Caesarean section. Surely,
though, “from his mother’s womb untimely ripp’d” presents us with a much less sanitised image; presumably
he was either cut from his mother after her death or he miraculously survived when his mother’s belly was
brutally ripped open by invading soldiers.
Candidates need to know that the words “Say whether he is a fit avenger” require more than a yes/no response.
Supporting evidence is always required.
THE GLASS MENAGERIE
Question 3
Candidates were asked to say what could be learnt from the setting as the curtain rises on the play, to relate the
sequence of events in the first scene and to outline the major themes that emerge in this scene. Most were able
to identify aspects of setting, but did not say what we could learn from them. Most were able to relate the
events, though not in the correct order, and some drew on material from outside this scene. The last part of the
question tended to be poorly done, with candidates listing the “themes” from the last syllabus (love and family
relationships, freedom, power and authority, etc.) without linking them to what they observed in the events and
setting of this scene.
Question 4
This question focused on the influence of men on powerful women (Mr Wingfield/Amanda) and oppressed
women (Jim/ Laura). The most challenging part of the question was the section in which candidates were
required to say how Williams makes Wingfield’s influence appear “dramatically striking”. Here it became
evident that the play’s dramatic devices had not been adequately dealt with by teachers. Many candidates
correctly identified the life-size photo of Wingfield as an example of a device that is “dramatically striking”,
but ignored the prompt telling them that 6 marks were available, and failed to expand on the impact of the
photo.
Section B – Poetry – Questions 5 - 6
General comments.
Examiners noticed a widespread absence of any evidence that candidates were being taught to read poetry as
a genre. Many candidate scored their marks on the (a) and (b) parts of the poetry questions, but were very
weak on the (c) part, the part that tests for understanding of the genre. Many candidates had no idea what an
image was and gave narrative instead of image in answer to Question 5c. The narrative merely repeated the
material in parts (a) or (b), the basic recall and comprehension sections.
Some candidates who were able to correctly select images, did not know what to do with them, so they simply
listed or paraphrased the relevant quotations. Others were a bit stronger and were able to say what the effect of
the image was, but very few were able to say HOW the image worked to achieve this effect. It is important that
students be taught the basic vocabulary of poetry (terms such as ‘image’ for example cannot be given layman’s
interpretations), be able to identify and NAME basic figures of speech (e.g. simile, metaphor, alliteration), be
able to identify basic structural devices (repetition, rhyme) and be able to explain HOW in particular poems these
devices work to create certain meanings and effects. This does not mean students are expected to exhibit the
sophistication of a CAPE student. But the fact that significant numbers were able to handle Section c of both
questions indicates that these requirements are not unrealistic. They are in fact an excellent preparation for
CAPE.
- 7 -
Question 5
Students clearly enjoyed these two poems and wrote with conviction. However, they need to be taught the
skills of writing a comparative analysis. Many listed the characteristics of one mother and then those of the
other instead of finding points of comparison to show the ways in which the two women are similar/are
different.
Question 6
Martin Carter’s poem proved more accessible to students than Auden’s. Candidates were able to identify the
oppressors, but were not so sure about what they do. The section requiring candidates to say what makes the
oppressors appear mysterious was clearly problematic. Candidates generally wrote fairly well on the horror
communicated in each poem. A number of candidates were able to write well on the way Auden uses the sonnet
form to achieve his purpose, and many, too, were able to discuss the effect of the oxymorons and other devices
that Carter employs.
Section C – Prose Fiction – Questions 7 – 10
General Comments
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. Texts
from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. Students
must be advised on choosing a question appropriate to the two texts they wish to write on. To choose The Pearl
to write about an experience from schooldays was plain foolhardy!
Students must be taught to focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story of the
novel. The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is
used explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring out
points of similarity and difference.
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalised, candidates need to be guided by teachers on how to
structure their essays. Generally each essay will fall into four parts—two parts for each novel. For instance, in
Question 7, it was necessary (a) to identify and explain the challenge faced, and then (b) to show the ways in
which the major character moved to maturity as he/she faced that challenge. In Question 8, the candidate
needed (a) to describe the way that class prejudice expressed itself in the society depicted, and then (b) to show
how the major character was affected by that prejudice. Students need to be shown how to read the question,
to break it down into its component sections and then to write about each section as fully as possible. A
reasonable rule of thumb would be to assume approximately equal marks for each of the four sections.
Generally it was found that candidates had a grasp of the story line, but often had not taken time to probe into
the deep conflicts and moral questions beneath the surface. More class discussion of issues presented in the
novels seems to be called for.
Question 7
Candidates who did well in this question were those who were able to identify life’s challenges and analyse
ways in which dealing with those challenges had transformed the major character into a mature person. They
were able to “use” the novels to support the points they made and presented their points in a clear, logical
manner.
- 8 -
Question 8
Surprisingly few candidates used Crick Crack Monkey to respond to this question, though it would have been
eminently suitable, and many used A Separate Peace , which was certainly not the wisest choice. Social class
was not always identified. Misreadings abounded: Kino in The Pearl was considered to be “greedy” instead of
ambitious, and was accused of “wanting to be like the same whites he despised”; Mr Gidharee in Green Days
was seen as an “exploiter/manipulator” rather than as being interested in Shell’s welfare. Candidates working
with Crick Crack Monkey compared Tantie and Aunt Beatrice instead of addressing the question.
Question 9
Only A Separate Peace and Crick Crack Monkey were suitable choices for this question, and students who
chose the other two texts handicapped themselves from the outset. Surprisingly, since it asked for discussion of
a schooldays experience, the question was generally not well done. Quite a few candidates moved away from
the novels to relate their own schooldays experiences. They need to be reminded that while literature often
mirrors our own experiences, all examples supporting points made must be from the literary texts.
Question 10
This question on setting was well done, which suggests that teachers are focusing more on the techniques of
the novelist. This is encouraging. Green Days and The Pearl were the popular choices, though A Separate
Peace allowed for rich discussion by candidates who had fully understood the symbolism used extensively in
this novel.
General
Overall performance in 2006 remained stable. Candidates tended to do better in Paper 1 than in Paper 2. This
is probably because students need more help with essay-writing skills. In the poetry questions, particularly,
more development of points was required. Narration was a problem in the responses to questions on prose
fiction.
Teachers are reminded that this syllabus focuses on the three genres, and candidates will be examined
accordingly. For drama, candidates need to be able to consider a given scene in detail and show how its events,
mood and placement contribute to the play. For poetry, candidates need to be able to identify and discuss the
effectiveness of poetic devices and to move from quotation to analysis. For prose fiction, candidates need to
move away from re-telling the story to focusing on the requirements of the question. Aspects of the novel like
character, conflict, theme, and language all need to be discussed in the classroom. In all three genres, candidates
should be urged to write their answers in well-constructed, logically flowing essays; it is not satisfactory for
them to present a sectionalised answer.
C A R I B B E A N E X AM I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON THE CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE 
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2007 
ENGLISH B 
- 2 - 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
JUNE 2007 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
In 2007, approximately 19,363 candidates wrote the examination. This examination, the second for the revised 
syllabus, showed a significant improvement in candidates’ performance. In 2006, 44.68 per cent of the 
candidates achieved Grades I - III. This number increased significantly in 2007 with 70.26 per cent achieving 
Grades I - III. 
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with the texts, and there was evidence of an 
increased personal involvement with the material and an emotional response to the conflicts and struggles being 
discussed. 
Again this year, parts of questions that required simple recall were generally done well, but weaker candidates 
were not so competent when called on to analyse situations. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic devices 
or poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the “story”. Since this 
new syllabus is genre-based, it is important for teachers to guide students to examine dramatic and poetic 
devices and to be able to discuss their effectiveness. A large number of candidates simply omitted the part of the 
question requiring comments on dramatic or poetic devices. 
Candidates need to be reminded of the importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in the 
prose fiction section where there is no sectionalizing to prompt them. Words such as “Comment on”, “Identify”, 
“Discuss”, “Compare” require different responses, and “briefly” means just that. 
Students need to be taught to focus on the specific requirements of the question and answer each part as 
thoroughly as possible with supporting evidence from the text – not to narrate the story, and not to write 
everything they know whether relevant or not. 
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. 
Intention of Questions 
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus: 
Understanding 
Knowledge of Text and Insight 
 (i) relevance and adequacy of content 
 (ii) relevance and accuracy of examples 
Expression 
Organization of Response 
 (i) structure and development of responses 
 (ii) clear and logical argument 
- 3 - 
Quality of Language 
 (i) clarity and appropriateness of expression used 
 (ii) mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling) 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01 
This paper tests 
 (i) comprehension 
 (ii) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
These skills require 
 (i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage 
 (ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and “props” 
 (iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 (iv) awareness of the interaction among characters 
 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus) 
 (i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; 
to make a rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living. 
 (ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections 
of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question). 
 (iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism. 
 (iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses. 
 (v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in 
the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 2. 
 (vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular 
text. 
 (vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
- 4 - 
Paper 01 
Comments on Candidates’ Performance
 
Question 1: Drama
 
Overwhelmingly, candidates demonstrated their understanding and appreciation of the immediacy of the drama, 
as they responded energetically to the episode. They recognized the need to infer the feelings of the characters 
from the stage directions as indicated by the question, and linked the evidence to the feelings of excitement, 
tension and anxiety. A major contribution of the study of literature is to enable students to name and distinguish 
emotions and feelings. Some candidates did not get beyond the cliché of ‘having the spirit of carnival’ or the 
‘carnival feeling’. Some demonstrated an inability to use evidence to support their estimate of Pa’s importance 
in the household. Conclusions that Pa was the sole breadwinner cannot be supported by ‘your father’s costume 
take every cent we had.’ Exercises to make inferences from evidence are invaluable in all genres. Thankfully, 
the vast majority of candidates were able to demonstrate mastery of this skill on this occasion. Determining the 
conflict in this scene required analysis of the evidence. Most candidates recognized the central point of conflict, 
and full marks, achieved by many, were awarded for identifying the underlying cause. Most candidates 
correctly identified excitement and tension as the best description of the atmosphere, but some did not use the 
evidence from the two main characters to justify their answer. The marks allocated to a question is a useful 
guide to the fullness of an expected answer, The purpose of Question 1 (e) was to test candidates’ appreciation 
of the extract as a scene to be viewed on stage. A candidate could have scored three marks for any three of the 
following: 
• the music; 
• the humorous drunken song at the beginning; 
• the quarrel between Ursula and Marilyn adding tension; 
• the suspense wondering whether Pa will support Marilyn against Ursula; 
• Marilyn's dancing; 
• the contrast between the merriment outside and the tension within; 
• the suspense wondering what exactly Pa’s costume is for; 
• the suspense wondering if Marilyn will get to play mas; 
• any other reasonable answer focusing on dramatic qualities (effect on watching audience) 
Many candidates had difficulty in distinguishing between the carnival excitement that happens unseen offstage 
and the anxiety that predominates onstage. Performance on the drama was considerably better than last year. 
The mean performance increased from 5.77 in 2006 to 10.59 in 2007. 
 
Question 2: Poetry
 
The responses revealed that most candidates struggled with the experience of the poem this year. While most 
candidates correctly identified the ‘arms’ as bayonet-blade, bullet heads and cartridges or their synonyms, some 
candidates did not recognize this central idea and were therefore handicapped. The speaker was suggesting that 
the boy should examine the arms and understand the damage they can cause. Many candidates strained 
reasonable interpretation when they extrapolated that the boy was forced to be a heartless mass murderer. While 
most candidates were able to identify an example of personification, they were unable to comment adequately 
on its effectiveness. While some adept abstract-thinking poetry readers indicated courage, endurance and 
maturity as the things the boy lacks, many restated what was mentioned in the poem but found difficulty in 
explaining why his lacking them was significant. The use of the language of suggestion was tested in (e) but not 
many were able to identify appropriate phrases. Candidates could have scored the full two marks for any two of 
the following:
• His teeth seem for laughing round an apple 
- 5 - 
• To stroke 
• Nuzzle in the hearts of lad - suggests cuddling 
• Fingers supple 
• Thickness of curls 
Question 3: Prose
 
The delightful prose passage posed some difficulty for candidates. Most candidates were able to earn at least 
two marks by providing evidence from what they learnt about the narrator from the first three paragraphs. 
Evidence that the narrator and her sister were from a mixed cultural heritage required mention of both American 
and Haitian roots, and the passage abounds with evidence of cultural practices, values, beliefs, celebrations and 
cuisine. The cause of the conflict between Ma and the girls was represented by a specific event, their request to 
be pall bearers, which heightened the ongoing conflict of values between the generations. Many candidates 
identified the specific incident but ignored the underlying cause. Most candidates were able to identify cases of 
Ma’s speech without the quotation marks, but the use of italics for emphasis, irony or sarcasm was not widely 
understood. Generally, candidates’ inability to earn the maximum in responding to one way in which the father 
is significant reflects the need for a greater teaching focus on strategies of close reading of prose extracts, 
demonstrating knowledge of structure, point of view, contrast of characters, episode and theme elaboration, each 
of which could be exploited in this case. 
Paper 02 
General Comments on Candidates’ Performance 
Since two of the questions on this paper are comparative analyses, it is important for candidates to be trained in 
the skills of structuring a comparative essay. Candidates need to be instructed on how to read a question 
carefully, paying attention to each section, and, where applicable, noting the proportion of marks being awarded. 
They should be encouraged to use the sections in the questions as a guide to structuring their essays, but 
should not present their response in segments—and certainly not with each segment on a separate page. 
Vocabulary building is necessary; students need not merely to be able to identify an example of a character’s 
typical behaviour or an example of mood shift, but should be able to name the character trait or mood that is 
being illustrated. Names of people and places should be correctly spelt, and problem spellings should be 
anticipated and prepared for. Correct spelling of words like throne, soldier, prophecy, heir can be taught, for 
example, when preparing candidates to answer a question on Macbeth. 
For the Poetry section, it is important for candidates not only to identify and give an example of a figure of 
speech, but also to discuss its effectiveness in that poem. 
For the Drama section, it is important for candidates not only to know in detail what takes place in any particular 
scene, but to be able to connect that scene with the entire play in terms of plot, theme, character revelation, 
mood and conflict. 
Section A - Drama 
Questions 1 - 4
Too many candidates attempted questions on both of the plays. Only one question may be selected from this 
section. Teaching should prepare candidates to discuss the relationship of a particular scene to the total effect of 
the play. Candidates need not merely to be able to recount the events or describe character; they should be able 
to comment on dramatic techniques such as contrast, irony, foreshadowing, suspense, etc., and, in modern plays, 
on the stage setting, use of lighting, music, costumes, and so on. 
- 6 - 
Candidates should be reminded that the segments in the questions are intended to guide in essay planning. Too 
many candidates ignore the instruction to write each answer in essay format. 
MACBETH 
Question 1
This question focused on the mental and moral deterioration of Macbeth during the course of the play. 
Candidates generally scored well in part (a), which asked for the circumstances and motive in four killings 
carried out or ordered by Macbeth. In part (b), where they were asked to find evidence of his mental and moral 
deterioration, some candidates were less confident, and many failed to differentiate between mental, on the one 
hand, and moral on the other. It was clear that many candidates could easily recall Macbeth’s actions, but had 
not gone to the next stage of evaluating them. The final section tended to be poorly done: candidates knew 
when they felt admiration or sympathy for the protagonist, but were quite at sea when asked to comment on the 
effect of Shakespeare’s strategy in manipulating our emotions. Time management was also a problem, and 
candidates need to be aware of the marks available for each section of the question. 
Question 2
This was the less popular of the two Macbeth questions, and it was generally handled slightly less competently 
than Question 1. This may have been because it focused on a small, more specific, portion of the play. 
Candidates were able to outline the events in the scene identified, but had difficulty naming the various moods 
created – possibly a matter of limited vocabulary rather than of insensitivity. Most candidates managed to show 
the contrast between Lady Macbeth and Lady Macduff, though weaker candidates did not understand 
“contrasted”, and tried instead to find similarities between the two women. Most candidates were able to 
connect the events in the scene to Macduff’s role as avenger in the final battle. 
THE GLASS MENAGERIE 
Question 3
This question focused on Amanda’s character and her role in the tragic events in this play. Candidates were 
mostly able to recall in detail the incident referred to in the prompt quotation. In the second section of the 
question, they were generally able to illustrate Amanda’s character traits, but not to name them. This inability 
appears to result from limited vocabulary, and, perhaps, non-familiarity with the word “traits”. The final 
section, in which candidates were required to show how Amanda’s character traits contribute to the tragedy 
within her family, was poorly done on the whole. Again, the pattern emerged that candidates were able to 
handle recall questions, but were weaker when it came to analysis. 
Question 4
This question required the candidates to discuss the psychological implications of family relationships in the 
play. Most candidates were able to give evidence of Laura’s inferiority complex. Most were less comfortable 
applying the comment to Tom – some candidates apparently being thrown off course by the fact that Tom is not 
present when the comment is made. Certainly detecting a sense of inferiority in Tom takes more insight than 
detecting the same problem in Laura, and Tom, of course, fights hard to preserve his self-esteem. Predictably, 
part (c), requiring a comment on “significance and dramatic effect”, was poorly answered. Candidates need to 
step back from the words and actions of any particular scene and ask themselves how the part contributes to the 
whole; they must be able to discuss the dramatic impact of any specific moment in the play. Terms like irony, 
climax, foreshadowing must be part of the candidate’s working vocabulary. 
- 7 - 
Section B – Poetry 
Questions 5 - 6
General comments 
There is room for improvement in the teaching of poetry. For Question 6, there were too many scripts in which 
candidates totally misinterpreted both poems. For Question 5, some candidates submitted opinions based on 
experiences extraneous to the poems. Many candidates scored their good marks on the (a) and (b) parts of the 
poetry questions, but were very weak on the (c) part, the part that tests for understanding of the genre. 
Candidates tended to be unable to name devices used in the poems, or, if they knew the name of a device, were 
unable to provide an example of that device. Others named a device and gave an example, but were unable to 
comment on how the device functioned in that particular poem. Many candidates merely quoted parts of the 
poem that were particularly striking and commented on them, but were not able to actually name the device 
being used. 
It is important that students be taught the basic vocabulary of poetry, be able to identify and NAME figures of 
speech (e.g. simile, metaphor, alliteration), be able to identify basic structural devices (repetition, rhyme) and be 
able to explain HOW in particular poems these devices work to create certain meanings and effects. 
The classroom experience of a poem should include discussion of point of view, tone, allusion, imagery, irony, 
contrast, the appropriateness of the title, and other such devices. 
Question 5
Candidates clearly enjoyed these two poems and wrote with enthusiasm. However, they need to be taught the 
skills of writing a comparative analysis. Candidates tended to deal with first one and then the other poem, with 
little attention to comparison. Some candidates misinterpreted item b) ii (Comment on the effects on the 
children), and offered a general discussion of the benefits of discipline instead of confining their observations to 
the content of the poems. The section on poetic devices proved the most challenging. 
Question 6
Generally well done. Again, the first two sections of the question, which required recall and comprehension, 
were handled far better than section c), which asked for a discussion of poetic devices. It is important for 
candidates to be able to identify devices/techniques used by the poet, and to discuss their effectiveness in the 
poem being analysed. Fewer candidates attempted this question than did Question 5, but performance in 
Question 6 was slightly better. 
Section C – Prose Fiction 
Questions 7-12
The Examining Committee learnt that not all examination centres had distributed the erratum sheet that 
accompanied this year’s examination paper (Paper 2). To deal with this problem, a decision was made to accept 
answers to any of the six questions (four on the original paper and two on the erratum sheet). 
In the comments that follow, the questions on the erratum sheet are re-numbered 11 and 12 to prevent confusion. 
- 8 - 
General comments 
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. Texts 
from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. Many 
candidates wrote on the “novels” Macbeth and The Glass Menagerie. 
Candidates must be taught to focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story. They 
should avoid trying to answer all four questions in one essay. 
The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is used 
explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring out points of 
similarity and difference. 
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalized, candidates need to be guided by teachers on how to 
structure their essays. Many candidates also need guidance on correct paragraphing. 
Candidates should be encouraged to study all four of the novels on the syllabus, and should be taught to use 
their reading time to select a question carefully. Story-telling should be avoided, proper names should be 
correctly spelt, and titles should be underlined. 
Question 7
This question allowed candidates to explore the dynamics of relationships. The better candidates understood that 
the question required them to see the positive and negative elements in ONE relationship, and they handled this 
well. Weaker candidates tended to discuss one relationship that was “joyous and fulfilling”, and a different 
relationship that was “sorrowful and burdensome”—missing the point of the question. 
Question 8
This question focused on the difficulties of growing up as experienced by a major character in both a West 
Indian and a non-West Indian novel. Some candidates ignored the instruction to focus on a major character, and 
selected a minor figure instead. The main weaknesses in responses to this question were story-telling instead of 
analysis and failure to structure the essay as a comparison. 
Question 9
There were not many superior responses for this question. Many candidates were able to identify family 
relationships but could not say how the relationship affected a major character. In fact, many candidates gave 
confusing answers and failed to focus on the question. Some candidates limited their discussion to a relationship 
of the major character with only one other family member, and this sometimes negatively affected their scores. 
Question 10
Candidates were asked to discuss ways in which a major character in each of the texts selected was affected by 
the illness or death of someone close to him/her. The more thoughtful responses focused on the psychological 
effects of dealing with sickness or death of someone close while the weaker responses confined their discussion 
to physical changes that resulted. In the latter case, essays tended to slide into story-telling instead of analysing 
the deeper consequences of coping with these difficult experiences. 
- 9 - 
Question 11
Candidates who understood what was meant by “landscape” tended to do very well on this question; they had 
evidently been well prepared. Too many candidates simply did not know what the term means, and used it 
synonymously with physical or social environment – especially those who wrote on Crick Crack Monkey. 
Many candidates wrote about the behaviour of characters rather than about changes in attitude and personality. 
Some very good responses dealt with the evident symbolism in the landscape in, for instance, Green Days by the 
River and A Separate Peace. Responses on The Pearl and Crick Crack Monkey were not generally very good. 
Question 12
This was by far the most popular prose question. The question invited candidates to consider the way a major 
character copes with a challenge during the course of the novel, but still has more problems to deal with as the 
novel draws to an end. Misinterpretations of the question abounded, with many candidates dealing with one 
challenge faced early in the novel and several more towards the end of the novel. Responses that ranged over a 
series of challenges tended to fall into story-telling. Some candidates selected characters that were inappropriate 
to the discussion: Leper, Juana, Tantie, for instance. Nevertheless, some of the better candidates came to grips 
with the requirements of the question, and discussed the fact that, even after dealing with one big challenge, 
Gene has to go on living with his guilty memories, Kino has to rebuild his life after the loss of his son, Tee has 
no sense of identity as she migrates to England, and Shell faces many difficulties as he enters married life with 
Rosalie. 
Appendix 1 shows the Analysis of the candidates’ responses. 
General 
Overall performance in 2007 showed a significant improvement over that of 2006. In Paper 01, the drama 
question was done better than either poetry or prose, which seemed to present equal difficulty to candidates. In 
Paper 02, candidates performed similarly in each of the three genres. 
- 10 - 
APPENDIX – 1 
Question # Text No of 
Responses 
Percentage of 
Candidates 
Drama 
1 11148 57.5 
2 
Macbeth
2191 11.3 
3 1455 7.5 
4 
Glass Menagerie 
4592 23.7 
Poetry 
5 11594 59.8 
6 
World of Poetry 
7624 39.3 
Prose Fiction * 
7 4424 22.8 
8 4023 20.7 
9 981 5.0 
10 1185 6.1 
11 914 4.7 
12 7788 40.2 
*Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for comparison from 
the following: 
West Indian 
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge 
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony 
Non West Indian 
A Separate Peace John Knowles 
The Pearl John Steinbeck 
C A R I B B E A N E X AM I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON THE CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2008 
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2007 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
JUNE 2008 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
In 2008, the final year of the first cycle of the new syllabus (2006-2008) the overall examination 
performance was slightly below that of 2007. Mark allocations were indicated for the various parts of the 
questions on drama and on poetry, and candidates were able to respond to the weighting given to each 
section. Mark allocations were not indicated for the prose questions, so in this Profile candidates were 
given greater latitude for structuring their responses. 
Candidates were generally quite familiar with the texts, and there was pleasing evidence of personal 
involvement with the material as candidates responded with enthusiasm and emotion to the conflicts and 
issues raised.
Again this year, parts of questions requiring simple recall were consistently done well, but analysis of 
situations proved difficult for weaker candidates. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic devices or 
poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the ―story‖; 
however, a number of superior scripts suggest that students are well able to master these aspects of 
literary studies once they are carefully taught. It was heartening to note that most candidates can name 
various devices though they often failed to identify the device in the text. Discussion of the effectiveness 
of the device in conveying the theme of the work tended to be a challenge for all but the really good 
candidates. On the whole, candidates tended to score low marks in sections of the questions requiring 
comments on dramatic or poetic devices. 
Although questions are sectionalized, candidates need to be reminded that their responses should be in 
essay format. Far too many candidates sectionalize their responses—even putting the sections on separate 
pages in their answer booklets. There is need, too, for students to be taught techniques for producing 
flowing essays; connectives were noticeably absent, particularly where candidates were attempting 
comparisons. 
Candidates need to be reminded of the importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in 
the prose fiction section where there is no sectionalizing to prompt them. They should also be guided by 
the number of marks allotted to each section, ensuring that they provide a full response when several 
marks are available. 
It was evident that many candidates did not understand prompt words such as ―Comment on‖, ―Identify‖, 
―Explain‖, ―Discuss‖, ―Compare‖. Students need to be taught to focus on the specific requirements of the 
question and answer each part as thoroughly as possible with supporting evidence from the text—not to 
narrate the story, and not to write everything they know whether relevant or not. When the question asks 
for the candidate‘s opinion (―Which of the two poems do you find more disturbing?‖), the response must 
be supported by evidence from the text; it is not acceptable in a literature examination for the candidate 
merely to draw from personal experience. 
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. 
Intention of Questions
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus:
Understanding 
- 3 -
Knowledge of Text and Insight
 (i) relevance and adequacy of content 
(ii) relevance and accuracy of examples 
Expression 
Organization of Response 
(i) structure and development of responses 
(ii) clear and logical argument 
Quality of Language 
 (i) clarity and appropriateness of expression used 
(ii) mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling) 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01 
This paper tests 
 (i) comprehension 
(ii) awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
These skills require
 (i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage. 
 (ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and ―props‖
(iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
(iv) awareness of the interaction among characters
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus) 
 (i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and 
plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness 
and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living. 
 (ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis 
(the ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various 
sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question). 
(iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism. 
(iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses. 
- 4 -
 (v) The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques 
in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is 
tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 2. 
(vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text. 
(vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature. 
Comments on Student Performance in Paper 1 
 
When compared with the last two years, the questions on the 2008 Paper 01 reflected a greater focus on 
understanding literary techniques and their effectiveness in the genre rather than questions testing 
understanding of concepts embedded in the extracts. 
More marks were also allocated to questions that demanded a higher level of interpretation and analysis. 
Teachers and candidates should note that this trend in the weighting of marks in Paper 01 will continue. 
Average performance in Drama (6.18) was better than Poetry (5.54) or Prose (5.03) and this surprisingly 
disappointing performance belied the engagement with the experiences in the extracts which many if not 
most candidates displayed. Candidates are clearly excited by the extracts. What they need to display now 
is disciplined thought in response to the questions. 
The first two questions on the drama allowed candidates who were most discriminating to gain maximum 
marks by providing complete details. They recognized that patrons were normally expected in the shop 
and this earned the third mark as they also mentioned the two named characters. Most candidates earned 
2 of the three marks for identifying two named characters. The same gradation occurred in response to 
(b) with the more discerning candidates who recognized and mentioned Petit Belle Lily‘s different 
interest to the love relationship thus earning the full 2 marks. 
This trend was even more marked in candidates‘ responses to (c) and (d) which tested candidates‘ 
understanding of the drama as a staged performance. In (c) candidates who included both the 
‗preparation for‘ and the ‗crowning of‘ the stick-fighting champion earned the full 2 marks. Candidates 
were able to earn marks for citing appropriate evidence which is replete in the stage directions as well as 
in the action of Briscoe and his conversation with Joe. Dramatic techniques and candidates‘ comments on 
their effectiveness were the focus of (d), and here only an exceptional few earned total marks. We cannot 
overstress that the focus of this paper is to allow students to demonstrate their appreciation and 
awareness of the literary genres and how they work. Candidates should avoid the vague generalities and 
identify specifically how, for example, Briscoe dramatizes his transformation from an inconspicuously 
dressed customer into the potential king stick fighter in his miming. 
The same pattern of focus on the literary qualities of the genre is reflected in the questions on the Poetry 
and Prose passages. Unfortunately and disappointingly, even when candidates identified similes they 
were not able to comment competently on their effectiveness. Often, they gave general or vague 
commentary on outstanding similes. A few exercises in close reading of texts and focused response to the 
writer‘s intention and effect would be excellent preparation for the required skills. In the prose passage, 
several candidates were reluctant to recognize the speaker‘s flawed perspective and this led to fatal 
misinterpretations of this 
humorous passage. Candidates and teachers are again encouraged to approach Paper 01 with a 
determination to confidently apply the skills they honed in the study of the set texts in the genres to 
unseen passages. 
General Comments on Student Performance in Paper 02 
- 5 -
Once again it was evident that candidates need to be trained in the skills of structuring a comparative 
essay. They need to be instructed on how to read a question carefully, paying attention to each section, 
and, where applicable, noting the proportion of marks being awarded. While they are expected to use the 
sections in the questions as a guide to structuring their essays, candidates should not present their 
response in segments—and certainly not with each segment on a separate page. Vocabulary building is 
necessary; students need not merely to be able to identify an example of a character‘s typical behavior or 
an example of mood shift, but should be able to name the character trait or mood that is being illustrated. 
Names of people and places should be correctly spelt, and problem spellings should be anticipated and 
prepared for. Teachers are urged to anticipate and deal with key words that may be needed by the 
student. Fascinating spellings turned up for words such as Caucasian, prejudice, Ku Klux Klan, sarcasm, 
allusion, supremacy, crucifixion, scorpion—all words that must have been used in class discussions. 
It was evident that many candidates were better prepared this year to deal with poetic devices. Three 
steps are necessary: naming the device; quoting or otherwise clearly identifying the device; and, thirdly, 
saying what effect that particular device produces in relation to the overall intention of the poem. 
For the Drama section, it is important for candidates not only to know in detail what takes place in any 
particular scene, but to be able to connect that scene with the entire play in terms of plot, theme, 
character revelation, mood, conflict, and so on. Candidates should understand the symbolic nature of 
stage props, and be able to relate those visual symbols to the themes of the play. 
New Time Limit
With the 2009-2011 syllabus, the time allowed for Paper 2 will be reduced to 2 hours. In view of this, 
teachers may need to work with students on time management so that all three questions will receive 
adequate attention.
Section A – Drama 
Questions 1 - 4
Some candidates again attempted questions on both of the plays; however, only one question may be 
selected from this section. Candidates should be aware of the sequencing of events, and should be able to 
discuss the relationship of a particular scene to the total effect of the play. It is not sufficient for 
candidates merely to recount the events or describe character; they should be able to comment on
dramatic techniques such as contrast, irony, foreshadowing, suspense, etc., and, in modern plays, on the 
stage setting, use of lighting, music, costumes, and so on. 
MACBETH
Question 1
This question focused on the conflict within Macbeth‘s mind as he contemplates the act of regicide, on 
the ways in which Shakespeare evokes our sympathy as we watch this struggle, and on the play‘s 
insistence that killing the King is a most reprehensible act. Quite a number of candidates misinterpreted 
part (a) of the question, which asked for a description of Macbeth‘s conflicting thoughts and feelings as 
he ―contemplates the murder‖ of Duncan. They read this as ―looks at the scene of the murder‖. In part 
(b), candidates were asked to write about how Shakespeare evokes sympathy for Macbeth, and in part 
(c), to explain how 
Shakespeare makes it very clear that regicide is a most horrible crime. All three sections were fairly well 
done, but candidates need to be aware of the time sequence referred to. Time markers like “In the period 
leading up to Duncan’s murder”, “during this period” and “later” were sometimes ignored by 
candidates, with unfortunate consequences. 
Question 2
- 6 -
This was the more popular of the two Macbeth questions. Many candidates referred to movie versions of 
the play rather than to the text itself. As in question 1, many candidates were not alert to time markers: 
―as she prays‖, “in the hours that follow” and “at this stage”. Those who failed to observe the time 
frame required by the question tended to ramble through the play, producing evidence randomly. Section 
(a) tended to be poorly done, chiefly because candidates responded too briefly to gain the 9 marks 
available, but sections (b) and (c) were dealt with more competently. 
THE GLASS MENAGERIE
Question 3
 
This question focused on Amanda‘s destructive parenting methods. Some candidates seemed not to have 
realized that Amanda, though perhaps well meaning, causes psychological damage to her children—
particularly to Laura. While some candidates handled the dynamics of this domestic tragedy fairly well, 
many floundered and were unable to relate to the tensions underlying the action. 
Perhaps because the very concept of ―destructive behaviour‖ was unclear to many candidates, they were 
also unable to discuss the connection between the setting/the music and the impact on her children of 
Amanda‘s conversation and behaviour.
Question 4
This question proved challenging for many candidates. While candidates were able to list Tom‘s leisure 
time activities, some were unable to move from there to comment on what we can learn about him from 
his choice of activities. Section (b), too, proved difficult, with candidates failing to adequately justify 
their claim that Tom either was, or was not, selfish. Most importantly, though, candidates were generally 
unable to properly discuss Tom‘s function in the play as narrator—and consequently as the one who most 
wins our sympathy and whose point of view influences the opinion of the audience. Nor were most 
candidates able to show that Tom‘s actions drive the plot to its climax.
Section B – Poetry
Questions 5 – 6
General Comments 
It was evident from a large number of scripts that teachers have been paying more attention to poetic 
devices, and have been showing students how to discuss their effectiveness. There were still many cases 
of candidates being able to name a device but not identify an example correctly, or, alternatively, to name 
the device and identify an example, but then to be unable to proceed to discuss the effectiveness of that 
device. In most cases, any such discussion was very brief, and this led to poor marks when up to 4 marks 
were allotted for identification and discussion of one device. 
As in previous years, many candidates, when asked for their opinion, offered material extraneous to the 
poem instead of searching the poem itself for supporting evidence.
Many candidates were unable to identify the speaker in the poem, merely identifying him as ―the 
persona‖ instead of as ―a schoolboy who experiences racial prejudice in the classroom‖ or, in the other 
example, as ―an adult who is talking to his/her son about the hypocrisy rampant in society‖. Further, few 
candidates were able to comment on the effectiveness of the choice of speaker. 
The classroom experience of a poem should include discussion of point of view, tone, allusion, imagery, 
irony, contrast, the appropriateness of the title, the effectiveness of the choice of speaker and other such 
devices. 
- 7 -
It was encouraging to note that candidates generally were very familiar with the poems they chose to 
write about, and that they had done research into the historical moment in which the poem was produced. 
Another pleasing observation is that candidates responded with strong emotions to injustices presented in 
the poems. This enthusiasm is commendable, but it needs to be channeled into disciplined discussion of 
poetic devices that evoked such strong emotions. 
Question 5
Some of the scripts responding to this question were outstanding, but generally it was not well done. 
Quite a number of candidates wrote about poems other than the two identified in the question. Generally 
candidates did well on Section (a), describing the kind of prejudice (race/class) in the poems, and were 
able to find examples of that prejudice at work. Section (b) required identification and discussion of two 
poetic devices in each poem. This section was tackled less confidently than Section (a) that required only 
recall and not analysis. It was extremely pleasing, though, to note that quite a few scripts dealt very 
sensitively with the use of allusion in the two poems—to fairy tale and folklore in the one, and to the 
Crucifixion in the other. Section (c) asked the candidate to compare the two poems, showing (with 
reasons) which was more disturbing. In a question of this sort, candidates should comment on the 
disturbing features of EACH poem and then conclude with a decision on which is MORE disturbing. 
Candidates who only dealt with one poem at this point lost a few marks. More important, though, is that 
many candidates relied too heavily on material extraneous to the poem as reasons for their choice. 
Candidates need to understand that in a literature examination, most supporting evidence for statements 
made must come from the work under consideration. 
Question 6
Candidates were generally able to identify the speaker in the poems (though some persisted in referring 
vaguely to ―the persona‖), but only the better candidates were able to say why the choice of speaker was 
effective. Section (b) was fairly well done, with candidates competently identifying aspects of society 
with which the speakers were not happy, and somewhat less competently identifying aspects of 
themselves with which the speakers were not happy. Section (c) was where most candidates did not earn
marks. Having correctly identified and illustrated a poetic device, they were most often unable to say 
very much about how that particular device contributed to the overall impact of the poem. The intense 
emotional identification of candidates with the two speakers‘ concerns (racism and hypocrisy in society) 
was very pleasing. 
- 8 -
Section C – Prose Fiction 
Questions 7 - 12
General comments
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. 
Texts from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. 
Many candidates wrote on the ―novels‖ Macbeth and The Glass Menagerie! 
Quite a number of candidates lost marks for writing on two West Indian novels or on two non-West 
Indian novels. The questions clearly indicate that one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel should 
be used. 
Story-telling was once again the main weakness in responses to questions in this Profile of the paper. 
Candidates should focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story. Generally 
speaking, candidates managed to deal with the part of the question that required recall, but fell down on 
the part that required analysis. 
The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is 
used explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring 
out points of similarity and difference. 
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalized, candidates need to be guided by teachers on 
how to structure their essays. Many candidates also need guidance on correct paragraphing. 
Candidates should be encouraged to study all four of the novels on the syllabus so that they will have a 
greater choice among the questions in this section. Next year, when the time for the exam is reduced to 2 
hours, candidates may well need help in planning their essays in such a way that they focus on the 
requirements of the question instead of resorting to story-telling. Proper names should be correctly spelt, 
and titles of novels should be underlined. 
Generally candidates managed better with the novels Green Days by the River and The Pearl than they 
did with Crick Crack Monkey and A Separate Peace. This last novel proved particularly challenging for 
most candidates. 
Question 7
 
This question invited candidates to consider conflict experienced by a major character in each of two 
novels and to comment on one issue that the writer wants readers to understand from that conflict. While 
candidates were fairly confident while writing about the conflict, they were less sure of themselves when 
moving from that recall activity to discussing the themes of the novels they had selected. 
Question 8
For this question the candidate needed to compare and contrast the situation in which a major character is 
affected by the power of a person, group or society. Responses that used A Separate Peace were 
particularly disappointing, with candidates making little use of the fact that the boys‘ lives are so 
devastatingly affected by the war. Responses using the other three texts were fairly well done. 
- 9 -
Question 9
This question asked candidates to examine the assertion that painful experiences in life help people to 
understand themselves and others better. Most candidates were able to identify painful experiences 
undergone by a major character in each text. Showing just what had or had not been learnt from those 
experiences proved rather more difficult. Better responses managed to weave together painful experience 
and lessons learned from that experience. 
Question 10
In this question candidates were asked to choose novels in which the main character suffers loss. The 
responses here showed a serious absence of structure, with candidates listing every single ―loss‖ 
experienced by the main character instead of selecting the two or three main examples in order to 
produce a focused essay. It was encouraging to see that some candidates, writing on The Pearl, were able 
to move beyond the obvious loss of Coyotito and of the pearl itself and to explain how Kino had lost out 
in terms of his relationship with Juana and his personal morality. Candidates who opted to use Crick 
Crack Monkey and A Separate Peace tended to have difficulty identifying the ―loss‖ experienced by the 
main character, though quite a number of candidates responded very sensitively to the loss of identity 
suffered by Tee as she tries to adjust to life with Aunt Beatrice. 
General 
Overall performance in 2008 was somewhat less impressive than in 2007. Paper 2, in particular, was 
handled better than Paper 1. It was evident that candidates who had been well prepared for the poetry 
questions on Paper 2 did exceptionally well, but that there were many candidates who seemed not to have 
been prepared at all for this Profile; indeed, those candidates who attempted only two questions rather 
than three almost always omitted the poetry question. There was less story telling in the Prose section, 
but many candidates lacked the skills to read the question carefully and interpret its requirements. For the 
Drama question, 
teachers need to deal with specifically genre-related devices (stage setting, conflict, stage directions, 
etc.), but they should also alert candidates to the time frame of events in the play: instructions limiting 
the response to a specific time period were often ignored. 
- 10 -
APPENDIX – 1 
Question # Text No of
Responses
Mean mark on
question
Drama
1 Macbeth
23 Glass Menagerie
4
Poetry
5 World of Poetry
6
Prose 
Fiction
* 789
10
*Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for 
comparison from the following: 
West Indian
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge 
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony 
Non West Indian 
A Separate Peace John Knowles 
The Pearl John Steinbeck 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2009 Caribbean Examinations Council ® 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved 
- 2 - 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2009 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The CSEC examination in English B consists of two papers. 
Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions one from each mode of writing – Drama, Poetry and 
Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‟ 
assessment. In each question candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. 
Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per 
cent to the whole examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions which are arranged under three sections 
which correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer
one question from each section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type A questions, two on each text. These questions require 
knowledge and study of one text. Candidates must answer one question. 
Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison that require 
knowledge and study of two texts. Candidates must answer one question. 
Section C, Prose Fiction, consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study West 
Indian novels as well as other novels in English from the prescribed list. Candidates must answer 
one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to 
the whole examination. 
Paper 01 – Short Answer Questions 
The disappointing results of this year‟s performance in Paper 01 reveal quite clearly that most 
candidates and their teachers are still under the mistaken belief that this paper is a comprehension 
exercise. It is not. This paper requires candidates to apply the core skills they develop in studying 
the writer‟s craft through their focus on the set texts. They are to demonstrate how well they can 
apply these skills to the unseen drama extract, poem and prose extract. 
The genre-based focus of the syllabus and examination since 2006 should have signaled a major shift 
in teaching and learning of literary appreciation. Instead of a focus on the content of the texts and 
the themes explored, teaching and learning in English B should now focus on how the artist 
(dramatist, poet and prose writer) shapes his/her work to affect the minds and hearts of the readers or 
audience. Previous schools‟ reports have emphasized that the questions will remain essentially the 
same, but the unseen passages will change. The syllabus outlines that the objectives are meant to 
cover the techniques the artist uses to manipulate how the reader will most likely think and feel about 
what the artist produces. Teachers who faithfully follow the philosophy and intent of the syllabus 
- 3 - 
will produce students who are critical thinkers, who will be able to read between the lines and see 
strategies of persuasion at work and so become less gullible and less easily manipulated. 
Performance in Paper 01 indicates that greater emphasis needs to be placed on preparation for 
responding appropriately to the questions on the paper. 
The mean mark out of 15 for Drama (7.04), Poetry (4.9) and Prose Fiction (8.43) charted a slight 
improvement in Drama and Prose Fiction from last year, but performance in Poetry fell below last 
year‟s. Teachers are urged to adopt a developmental approach in preparing candidates for success in 
this examination, and especially for this paper, where what is required is the application of skills they 
are expected to have honed in the study of their set text. 
Paper 02 – Extended Essay Questions 
The 2009 examination was the first testing of the new cycle of texts in the 2009-11 syllabus. 
Following on from requests from teachers‟ associations and teachers all questions in Section C, the 
prose section, could be answered using any of the four texts. (It should be noted that this represents a 
significant difference from the 2012-14 examination, in which all questions will be text specific). 
The 2009 examination also introduced a new approach to Question 6, the second of the poetry 
questions. This was a general question that allowed candidates to choose the poems they wished to 
discuss, based on a specified rubric or theme. The aim of this question was to allow greater latitude 
for candidates to show their knowledge of a wide range of poems on the syllabus. 
Candidates seemed to have approached the examination with enthusiasm and a high level of reader 
response, often showing passionate engagement with the characters and issues discussed, especially 
in poetry and drama. Most candidates knew the texts well. However, as in former years, some used 
drama and poetry texts to answer prose questions (Section C); in Section A, some relied on film 
versions of The Merchant of Venice instead of the text; and in Section B, some displayed inadequate 
knowledge of the poems. Some candidates appeared to have been well taught and put to good use the 
socio-historical contexts of the texts, including poems. Some, however, appeared to lack this 
knowledge even where it was necessary. 
Overall, most candidates performed well on the parts of questions requiring knowledge of the texts. 
The analytical aspects of the questions, that is, those that required candidates to show knowledge of 
the writer‟s craft, allowed well-prepared candidates to display their skills and elicited some excellent 
essays. However, these aspects continued to pose a major challenge for less well prepared 
candidates. Candidates showed familiarity with the vocabulary of literature, but many were unable to 
do much more than mention the names of devices. The problem was particularly apparent in their 
response to the poetry questions. It appeared least in the responses to the prose questions, but for a 
negative reason: too many candidates seemed unaware that prose writers also use devices, and 
tended to respond to prose with reference only to events. The better prepared candidates included 
discussion of literary features and devices such as setting, contrast, irony and symbols in their 
responses. Many candidates were unaware that phrases such as „how the writer shows…‟ require 
some attention to literary devices, and that words such as „discuss‟ and „comment on‟ call for 
analysis, not narration. Even so, there was a pleasing improvement in the attempts to focus on the 
demands of the questions rather than simply narrate. 
- 4 - 
With regard to language and organization, most candidates wrote in essay format and paragraph 
organization and use of English were generally satisfactory. Many who wrote in essay format 
attempted introductions and conclusions, and there was improvement in the attempt to make 
comparisons between the texts in particular questions. Some candidates produced excellent 
introductions that utilized all the key terms in the various sections of the questions. The better 
candidates also made transitions between paragraphs, using appropriate words, sentences and phrases 
such as „however‟, „in contrast‟, „both‟, „in the same way‟ to link the thoughts from one paragraph to
the next. 
However, some problems persist. In answering the structured questions, many candidates continue to 
write in itemized sections instead of essay format. Some even wrote each part of the question on a 
different page or separated by spaces from the preceding part. In some cases, all or most of the 
candidates from particular schools wrote in this way. Many who wrote in this format produced 
confused, repetitive responses because they did not conceptualize the essay as a whole. Material used 
in answer to one section was repeated in subsequent sections, as candidates seem to have read and 
answered one segment of the question, then gone on to read and answer the next segment, as in a 
short answer response. Students need to be taught to write in essay format, regardless of whether the 
question is structured or not. Instruction should also be provided on how to organize responses to 
non-structured questions, such as those in Section C. Candidates also need to be taught to 
conceptualize the question as a whole, and to frame their introductions with both texts in mind, in the 
case of questions requiring a response to two texts. 
Students should be reminded to underline the titles of novels and plays, to place the titles of poems in 
quotation marks, and to use capital letters to begin all the words in titles, except for function words. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short-Answer Questions 
Drama
Candidates experienced few problems in dealing with comprehension-type parts of the questions 
such as Part (b) which asked candidates to identify two stage props and Part (e) where they were 
asked to identify two different feelings the extract evokes in the audience. However, where 
candidates lost marks were in the parts of the questions which required that they show how the writer 
manipulated the dramatic techniques to achieve his purpose. For example, Part (b) also asked the 
candidates to state the importance of each stage direction identified. Part (c), which asked candidates 
to state two dramatic functions of the customers and the crowd, was poorly done. Teachers need to 
focus more on the elements of the genre and how the writer uses these elements to create meaning. 
Poetry
This question was badly done as the mean indicates. Of the 19,247 candidates who answered it 279 
or 1.5 per cent scored zero and only six candidates scored full marks. Part (a), which was worth one 
mark and merely asked the candidate to identify who “they” referred to, was not well done. Part (d) 
which asked candidates to identify the mood in specified lines also was not well done. These are 
questions which required comprehension of the poem. It was obvious from the responses to these 
questions that many of the candidates did not understand the meaning created in the poem. Hence, 
the poor performance in the other parts of the questions which required analysis of different aspects 
of the poetic techniques used by the writer to create meaning. 
- 5 - 
Prose
While candidates performed better on this question than on the poetry question, performance was not 
as good as expected. Candidates were able to answer quite well Parts (a), (b) (i), and (e). However, 
Parts (b) (ii), (c) and (d) proved to be challenging to many candidates. 
Paper 02 – Extended Essay Questions 
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on page 23 of the syllabus. 
Drama
Questions 1 and 2: William Shakespeare‟s The Merchant of Venice
As expected, most responses (a total of 71 per cent) in the drama section were on Questions 1 and 2 
combined. However, Question 1 was by far the more popular, accounting for approximately 63
percent of total responses in the drama section. Question 2 accounted for a little over 8 per cent. 
Most candidates performed well on Question 1. 
Question 1 
The overwhelming popularity of Question 1 can be attributed to the fact that it focused on the 
courtroom scene, the dramatic final showdown in the play. The problem of being carried away by 
film versions rather than focusing on the text was particularly apparent with this question. Both 
questions elicited high levels of reader response as candidates took sides with „the underdog‟ along 
both racial/ethnic (Shylock) and gender lines (Portia) or took sides on more „universal‟ moral lines, 
arguing that Shylock was immoral to want to commit murder, or that Portia was guilty of dishonesty, 
regardless of whether or not it was for a good cause. Many candidates had been taught the historical 
contexts of the play as well as the rules of argumentation and put these to good use in framing their 
arguments. However, as many candidates argued one-sidedly, ignoring factors such as the treatment 
meted out to Shylock and Jews generally, seeing the Venetians as all good, and Shylock as all bad. 
This seemed attributable as much to poor textual analysis as to lack of knowledge of the historical 
context. For example, Antonio‟s treatment of Shylock was often ignored.
 
Candidates scored well on Part (a), which required an outline of the legal issues being addressed in 
the courtroom. 
The least well-handled part of the question was Part (b) which required candidates to explain the 
punishment and mercy that Shylock received. Many candidates had no idea how to structure their 
response to this part. Instead of pointing out which parts of their responses had to do with 
punishment and which to do with mercy, candidates often merely listed the things done to Shylock, 
with no attempt to develop the points. Part (c), which required candidates to discuss ironic aspects of 
the scene, elicited some very interesting and acute discussions, and some candidates focused on 
dramatic irony. This part proved challenging for weaker candidates as they were either not familiar 
with „irony‟ or were unable to explain it properly. Some who were familiar with the device did not 
present both sides of the situation they considered ironic. Instead of fully outlined situations of irony, 
candidates gave hints through one-sided statements. 
 
- 6 - 
Question 2 
This question addressed the issue of morality in the play. This was not as well done as Question 1. 
Some candidates either did not understand what is meant by „moral‟ or ignored it completely. Part 
(a), which required candidates to discuss two moral lessons learnt by specified characters, sometimes 
elicited unfocused plot summaries involving these characters as candidates sought to display their 
knowledge of the play rather than to respond to the question. Part (c) required candidates to discuss 
how Shakespeare showed that Portia had moral weaknesses. Candidates interpreted this to mean any 
form of „weakness.‟ Some, especially those unfamiliar with the historical context, spoke about 
Portia‟s „foolish‟ obedience to her dead father. 
Questions 3 and 4: August Wilson‟s Fences
Approximately 8 per cent of the candidates attempted Question 3 and approximately 19 per cent
attempted Question 4. Most candidates had a sound knowledge of the text and performed well on 
both questions. Candidates identified with the characters in the text and seemed to have enjoyed 
writing their responses. Better prepared candidates addressed dramatic devices and strategies used by 
the playwright as required in Parts (a) and (b) of Question 3 and Part (c) of Question 4. 
Question 3 
Question 3 required candidates to outline the final scene of the play and to show how the playwright 
heightened the audience‟s feelings of sadness and regret while suggesting feelings of compassion 
and hope among Troy‟s family members. Candidates who did not know the play well introduced 
details outside of the scene and gave vague outlines of the scene itself. 
Question 4 required candidates to discuss how Wilson presents Troy‟s performance as a parent, 
comparing his performance with his father‟s as well as with Cory‟s assessment of him. Candidates 
were able to perform well on this question as the same information used in Part (a) could be used to 
answer Parts (b) and (c) with different commentary. Weaker candidates gave repetitive or story￾telling answers as they re-presented details without commentary directed at the specific parts of the 
question. 
Poetry 
Questions 5 and 6 
Approximately two-thirds (67 per cent) of the candidates who attempted Section B answered 
Question 5. This question required candidates to respond comparatively to two poems about death: 
„To an Athlete Dying Young‟ and „The Lynching.‟ However, the fact that one-third of candidates 
attempted the general question, Question 6, indicates that while the majority of candidates preferred 
the structured question, the new format for Question 6 has significant appeal. 
- 7 - 
Candidates produced some excellent responses to both questions, and many candidates obtained 
satisfactory scores. Surprisingly and pleasingly, many candidates obtained their best scores on these 
questions. However, too many scored most of their marks on the recall and interpretation aspects. 
The most important skill being tested is the ability to show how poetic devices are used to highlight 
themes and achieve particular effects. Most candidates seemed to have been exposed to the 
discussion of poetic devices and could name devices used. However, discussion of how the devices 
actually worked, and how they were linked to the overall meaning or theme being discussed, was 
often vague, rambling and confused. Some candidates gave the names of devices but could identify 
no example of the device in the poem. Most candidates who referred to puns and oxymoron had no 
idea what these terms meant. The difference in meaning among crucially important terms such
„poet‟, „persona/speaker‟ and „character‟ were often not known. Candidates confused the speaker 
with the poet, or identified a character in the poem as the speaker. The latter problem arose 
frequently with regard to „God‟s Work‟, a popular poem in answering Question 6. Mr Edwards was 
often identified as the speaker, possibly because he spoke a line of narrative in the poem. Often 
candidates did not know the poems well, and concocted their own versions of what the poems were 
about. Many candidates did not link the discussion of devices to the rest of the question. 
Question 5 
In answering Question 5, many candidates confused Dennis Scott‟s „Epitaph‟ with „The Lynching‟, 
and far too many candidates wrote without any apparent awareness of the historical context in which 
lynching took place. As a result, many held the erroneous idea that the lynched man was a slave, and 
some wrote without reference to the racial issue involved. Some candidates who did not know the 
poem well wrote that the crowd was both black and white. The poems, like the novels and plays, are 
set texts; thus, wherever necessary, the historical context should be taught. 
Question 6 
Question 6 required candidates to compare two poems that deal with the issue of power. The 
question had the advantage of being able to be answered with reference to almost all the poems on 
the syllabus. Although the question was less well handled than Question 5, candidates produced 
some fascinating, original and creative discussions and insights into the nature of power. Popular 
choices in answering the question were „Richard Cory‟, „God‟s Work‟, „God‟s Grandeur‟, „Colonial 
Girls‟ School‟, „Sonnets from China‟, „The Emigrants‟ and „This is the Dark Time, My Love.‟ 
„Sonnets from China‟ was often misread, but pleasingly, some candidates showed knowledge of the 
sonnet form and were able to comment on the relation between its structure and the poem‟s meaning. 
The same types of problems that arose for Question 5 also arose for Question 6. Many candidates 
compared the devices instead of showing how the devices highlighted the issue of power. Many did 
not know the historical context of „This Is the Dark Time, My Love‟ and wrote that the poet was 
depicting war in Guyana. 
One recurrent problem was the use of „invented‟ quotations. Candidates should be encouraged to 
give good paraphrases if they cannot remember the exact quotations. 
- 8 - 
Prose Fiction
Question 7 
This question, which asked candidates to discuss the writers‟ presentation of ways in which the 
traditions and values upheld by society may or may not be in conflict with an individual‟s potential, 
was attempted by 19 per cent of candidates who attempted Section C. Candidates addressed the term 
„traditions‟ in pleasingly diverse ways, including „folklore‟, „customs and practices‟, and „communal 
beliefs.‟ Some candidates addressed only traditions, while others addressed only values, but overall 
the question was well done. This question again highlighted the need for candidates to be taught the 
historical context of set texts. The absence of this type of knowledge was especially apparent in the 
case of Beka Lamb. Many candidates attempting to use the political situation in Belize as part of 
their argument had difficulty as they were completely unfamiliar with the historical situation. As 
with the other prose questions, weaker, less well prepared candidates engaged in story telling instead 
of organizing their responses around comment statements related directly to the question. 
Question 8 
This was the least popular of the prose questions, eliciting under 8 per cent of the responses. The 
question required candidates to discuss how writers use the natural environment to represent 
concepts or feelings. Its lack of popularity could be attributable either to candidates not knowing 
what is meant by „natural environment‟ or to the fact that they have not been taught the symbolism of 
nature as setting. Nature as an aspect of setting plays an important part in all four novels, especially 
The Hummingbird Tree and A Kestrel for a Knave. Setting, in all its aspects (natural, social, 
geographical), is an important aspect of the study of prose fiction. Candidates should be prepared for 
questions on this feature. Overall, candidates did not do well on this question. 
Question 9 
This question required candidates to discuss how being different from others affected a major 
character in two novels, and to comment on one strategy used by each writer in presenting this 
difference. Approximately 24 per cent of the candidates who attempted the Prose Section chose this 
question. Many ignored the part of the question that required analysis of the writer‟s strategy. Some 
candidates used drama or poetry texts and so could not score any marks. 
Question 10 
This question, which asked candidates to discuss the influence of family relationships on the 
development of major characters, was by far the most popular of the prose questions. It was 
attempted by approximately 51 per cent of the candidates. The question elicited some very good
responses, but about 40 per cent of the candidates engaged in storytelling instead of directing their 
responses to the specific question. While all the texts were appropriate, candidates often did not 
choose appropriate characters for analysis, or were unable to present arguments even where the 
character was appropriate. This was particularly evident with regard to all the major female 
characters (Jaillin, Sophie, Toycie) except Beka. Candidates may have studied the texts with an 
overarching focus on protagonists, neglecting the other significant characters. 
- 9 - 
Conclusions 
Candidates seem to have become more comfortable with the genre-specific direction of the syllabus. 
More teachers appear to be teaching poetry successfully in a serious way, and more attention appears 
to be paid to the skills of language use and organization. However, more needs to be done to help 
students explain HOW devices work to achieve their effects, and to use specific, concrete language 
(sight, sound, taste, etc) when discussing images and effects. Students need to be given adequate 
exercises in identifying and explaining puns, oxymorons, irony, and distinguishing between the 
speaker‟s voice and the voice of characters in narrative poems. More attention needs to be given to 
the writers‟ craft in prose fiction, and students should be guided to discuss not only main characters 
(protagonists) but other major characters as well. Skills in organizing essays need to be strengthened. 
Students need to write introductions and conclusions that focus on the question and help to minimize 
„mere narration.‟ In writing the body of the essay, they should be trained to use opening and closing 
sentences that keep the essay focused on the question asked. 
Recommendations to Teachers 
Give students practice in answering examination-type questions that are structured and 
„unstructured.‟ Guiding students to see structured questions as a whole, will help eliminate 
repetitions. „Unstructured questions‟ also have an inbuilt structure or logic of sequence that 
students can be guided to identify for themselves. 
Teach students the historical contexts of the set texts. Lack of knowledge of this context is 
especially a problem with regard to Shakespeare, Beka Lamb and the poems highlighted in the 
previous section of the report. 
With reference to The Merchant of Venice: students should know that Jews in Europe were the 
victims of unequal laws: for example, confined to areas referred to as ghettos; forced to wear 
distinctive symbols that identified them as „other‟; disallowed from owning real estate (Shylock‟s 
property would not have included land) and in most cases permitted only one form of occupation: 
usury. They should be aware that Shylock was the 16th century equivalent of our modern day 
banker and that the Rialto, where Antonio and the other merchants also gathered, was a financial 
centre. Students should be guided to recognize that both Antonio and Shylock were merchants, 
except that one sold money and the other sold goods, both for profit. Even though external 
research material is available, students can be guided to pay attention to the evidence of the facts 
above within the play itself. 
The gender-specific ironies in the play can be brought out by reference to the fact that in 
Shakespeare‟s day women were treated as „second class‟ and would not have had professions as 
lawyers, and that on the Shakespearean stage Portia‟s role would have been played by a boy 
actor. 
Dramatic irony should be given specific attention as a form of irony associated with the genre. 
Re the poems: Provide information on the history of lynching as a phenomenon of post-slavery 
America. Explain that lynching is an illegal act (a particular form of murder), so the term could 
not have been applied to a slave master killing his own slave since slaves were considered chattel 
(legal property), not humans. 
- 10 - 
Provide information on the context to which „This is the Dark Time‟ speaks- colonial Britain‟s 
attempt to stop the independence movement in Guyana in 1953, by suspending the constitution, 
declaring a state of emergency and bringing in soldiers to maintain control. Emphasize that no 
„war‟ took place.
While students at this level should not be „bogged down‟ with excessive contextual information, 
some brief knowledge about the poets might help their class discussions –for example, they 
might find it helpful to know that Caribbean-born poet James Berry has lived in the USA and 
resides in Britain and that Olive Senior is a Caribbean poet who, like Berry, grew up in the 
colonial period; that „Dreaming Black Boy‟ and „Colonial Girls School‟ reflect experiences in 
their different locations. Students could be encouraged to do their own internet and library searches.
Guide students to understand the following concepts: speaker, poet, character and narrator. 
Encourage students to use literary vocabulary in writing essays on prose, not just on poetry or 
drama. Teach texts from several angles: characterization; setting; symbols; themes. 
Make use of good student-centred texts available on the teaching of the syllabus, such as Carlong 
English B for CXC (Text with DVD). Keith Noel, Sheila Garcia-Bisnott and Carol Hunter￾Clarke. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2010 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2010 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing —
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section A
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section B
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Section C
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
The 2010 examination was the second testing of the new cycle of texts. There was a noticeable increase in 
appreciation, application and overall results in both Papers 01 and 02.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
-3- 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
There was a dramatic improvement in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. 
The mean scores for Paper 01 for the period 2008–2010 in the table below show the improvement in performance. 
Mean Scores for the Period 2008–2010 
Paper 01 2008 2009 2010
DRAMA 6.18 7.02 11.00
POETRY 5.54 4.9 10.49
PROSE 5.03 8.43 7.47
Candidates demonstrated an excellent grasp of the principles of literary appreciation and added their personal and 
heartfelt responses to the excerpts/texts in the three genres. Even with the Prose Profile, where the mean mark 
recorded a disappointing 7.47, most candidates displayed their imaginative flair and creative interpretations, 
although these were ponderously misapplied to the comic passage which required light treatment. 
The personal involvement from candidates was evident in their responses. It is clear that teachers have taken the 
advice from previous reports and the sensitization sessions on the revised syllabus and added new life to the study 
of Literature. 
Question 1
For Question 1, Drama, most candidates earned one of the two marks for Part (a). Although they were able to 
identify the marriage as the main concern of the scene, and which gave them 1 mark, many candidates did not 
mention the tension or disagreement among the women. This question required candidates to form a total picture 
of not just the event but also the conflict of the scene.
However, for Part (b), which assessed candidates understanding of the use of stage directions, the majority of 
candidates were able to earn full marks. Candidates were able to competently demonstrate what the stage 
directions revealed about the characters feelings and provided the relevant supporting evidence to earn full marks. 
The majority of candidates earned the total score for Parts (c), (d) and (e). Part (c) required candidates to quote a 
line which showed tension in the scene and to explain the tension. Part (d) was a question on characterization 
which focused on Mama. Candidates had to support their answer with one speech and one stage direction. This 
question was mastered. 
Part (e) was another characterization question which focused on the character, Jenny. Again, candidates handled 
the question quite competently. 
-4- 
Question 2
For Question 2, Poetry, most candidates were able to earn full marks for Parts (a), (c) and (e), but only a few 
achieved the total score in (b) and (d).
Part (a) asked candidates to identify three aspects of the poem that would appeal to a Caribbean person. 
Candidates were able to competently respond to this question. In Part (c) candidates were asked to identify in 
what way stanza four was different from the first three stanzas. In previous years, candidates had experienced 
difficulty when responding to questions which assessed their ability to recognize difference or contrast. This was 
not the case with this question. For Part (e), candidates were able to identify the images of sound and were able to 
indicate what impressions of the sea were created by the images. 
However, candidates‘ responses to Parts (b) and (d) reinforce the view that figurative devices and their 
effectiveness continue to be challenging to students. Teachers need to find innovative ways of showing students 
how writers use the different figurative devices to create the effect they want in their work.
Question 3
The overall mean for Question 3 indicated that Prose Fiction was not well done. While most candidates were able 
to score full marks in several parts of Questions 1 and 2, most candidates did not score full marks on any of the 
parts of Question 3. Part (c) proved most challenging. Candidates could not effectively identify and discuss the 
comical element in the passage. Expected responses were exaggeration (the gestures and costumes); contrast as 
for instance, the big, strong woman and the seemingly small, old, frail man; the diction and pantomime. A more 
careful reading of the passage would have assisted candidates in responding to the comic elements of the passage. 
Candidates did not seem to be able to picture this woman who looked like a German warrior. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage as a whole. 
Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful 
processing of the events described. In the case of this year‘s prose passage, the vast majority of candidates were 
unable to discern the comic element that dominated the extract. It appears that candidates conceive Literature as a 
ponderous study of only deep and serious concerns. Teachers need to help students expand that notion to embrace 
the more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in Literature and life. 
While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to offer 
students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students offer to the questions. Too 
often, candidates‘ admissible responses to questions are inaccessible to those who do not share knowledge of their 
dialect. We therefore recommend that teachers give students the feedback on the Standard English translation of 
their correct responses to the questions. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful attempts to 
have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and emotional 
responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students‘ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation 
to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the 
study of Literature is meant to engender. 
-5- 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1
The Shakespeare questions yielded almost two-thirds of the total responses for the drama section. For Question 1, 
candidates demonstrated knowledge of the casket scenes. However, except for Portia‘s response to Bassanio, 
they appeared somewhat vague about Portia‘s response to the other suitors. There was also some amount of 
confusion, about the inscriptions on the caskets. Part (c), (How does Shakespeare show us that the casket scene 
with Bassanio is important to the play as a whole?) was by far the most challenging area of the question. 
Acceptable responses dealt with the dramatic effect such as the tension; the building of suspense; and the contrast 
with the other scenes portraying Morocco and Arragon, by way of its romantic element. Candidates were also 
expected to make the link to the entire plot, that is, by guessing right, Bassanio is now able to marry Portia and as 
a result gets involved in Antonio’s case. Connections could have been made to the ring plot as well. This portion 
of the question aimed to assess candidates‘ understanding of the significance of Bassanio‘s victory to the 
development of the play, thematically, structurally and dramatically. The better prepared candidates produced 
well-developed essays and while no one scored full marks (35), seven candidates were able to score 34. The 
mean for this question was 16.31. 
Question 2
There was a certain element of comfort and ease in terms of responding to the details required in Question 2. 
Candidates were able to describe the money lending scene with Antonio and Shylock, Part (a). However, Part (b) 
which asked for two techniques which make the scene exciting proved to be more challenging. Candidates 
experienced some amount of difficulty in identifying the techniques and further, to link these to how they made 
the scene exciting. By merely relating the scene, candidates generally did not spend enough time discussing or 
showing how language for instance was used (for example, irony, pun) or how argument was used, or even the 
-6- 
presentation of Shylock (his slow, methodical, and deliberate language that aggravates Antonio) and Antonio. Part 
(c), which asked candidates to comment on how the scene brings out one issue or theme in the play might have 
been better handled if candidates had demonstrated understanding of the word issue and theme. Many responses 
simply regurgitated the plot and others did not effectively link the scene to the play as a whole. Candidates who 
mentioned race, religion, prejudice, the bond, values, did not often provide enough textual evidence. 
This question performed slightly better than Question 1. Eight candidates scored full marks. The mean for the 
question was 17.70. 
Fences 
Question 3
Question 3 was fairly well done. Part (a), Troy‘s confession and Rose‘s response to it which was required was 
quite familiar to candidates. On the whole, the candidates handled this part of the question very well, although 
the tendency was to re-tell the plot. For Part (b), even though candidates were asked to discuss three ways in 
which the relationship changed, some responses strayed from the Troy/Rose relationship. The final part of the 
question was well done by most candidates who attempted this question. They often explored wider implications 
with finesse. There were some though, who summarized the plot instead of, for instance, discussing one of the 
symbolic meanings of the fence; that is, keeping family in, which underscores the issue of faithfulness. 
Two candidates scored full marks on this question. This question also had the highest mean for the section. The 
mean for this question was 18.14.
Question 4 
Candidates were able to describe the chosen relationship very well. They were not, however, so effective in 
commenting on one dramatic device used to present the relationship, Part (b). Devices that could have been used 
are as follows: the symbolism of the fence and its ironic function (of keeping in and keeping out, and the self￾destructive nature of the relationship between Troy and Rose); contrast; irony; imagery as in the garden image, 
and the game. Part (c) was handled reasonably well as candidates were able to identify and discuss issues/themes 
such as infidelity, communication and sexuality quite competently. 
No candidates scored full marks on this question. However, one candidate scored 34 and 13 scored 33. The mean 
for this question was 16.54. 
Poetry
Question 5
Candidates‘ performance on this question was fair. The named poems in Question 5 were ―A Contemplation 
Upon Flowers‖ and ―God‘s Grandeur‖. Part (a) asked candidates to explain two lessons learned by the speaker by 
looking at Nature. The better able candidates performed remarkably well on this question. However, the weaker 
candidates deviated quite a bit from the lessons learnt. There was also some amount of confusion with the poems 
specified in the question and others listed in the syllabus. Candidates made reference to poems such as, ―God‘s 
Work‖ confusing it with ―God‘s Grandeur‖, and ―Travelling Through the Dark‖ instead of ―A Contemplation 
Upon Flowers‖. In instances when it appeared that some candidates could not relate the title of the poems to 
Nature which was required for Part (b), they repeated the material used in Part (a). Some candidates missed 
opportunities to discuss the impact of words in the titles and what they evoke, such as contemplation, flowers and 
grandeur. Many failed to make the significant connection to the importance of Nature.
-7- 
Although ―God‘s Grandeur‖ does not mention Nature, it mentions God. Nature is important only because of God; 
it is God‘s glory that is manifested in Nature and renews it. It was heartening to see that some candidates argued 
along this vein. 
Candidates were expected to focus either on diction or devices to answer Part (c). The word illustrate might have 
caused some amount of uncertainty in responses. Generally, there were some verbose explanations about nature 
as a whole, omitting obvious responses such as trans for ―A Contemplation Upon Flowers‖– ―God‘s Grandeur‖ 
personification, rhyme, diction and for similes, comparison, repetition, internal rhyme Too often, responses 
identified the choice of word but without textual support or did not indicate the speaker‘s feeling. 
Eleven candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 15.83. 
Question 6
Question 6 is the general question and candidates are required to choose two suitable poems from the prescribed 
list to answer the question set. Candidates seemed to have a strong preference for this kind of question as it 
yielded almost two-thirds of the responses. The storytelling element resonated well with candidates who sensibly 
and sensitively chose appropriate poems for discussion. Popular choices were ―Coolie Mother‖, ―For my 
Mother‖, and ―Richard Cory‖. Part (a) was well handled as candidates were able to outline the storyline in 
selected poems. It must be noted that candidates were not penalized for choosing lyrical poems such as ―God‘s 
Grandeur‖ as the burden was on the explanation. For example, the response could suggest how the speaker is 
looking around him and thinking about how Nature tells its own story of how humans fail to understand the 
meaning of Nature. 
Responding to why each poet finds it important to tell that particular story, Part (b), candidates demonstrated 
some level of analysis and carved out spaces for personal inputs, but weaker candidates repeated material already 
used in Part (a), returning as it were, to storytelling. Part (c), proved to be the most challenging as candidates 
were asked to discuss one device each poet used to make the story enjoyable. Some candidates indentified 
devices but could not show how these made the poems enjoyable. In some instances, devices were merely 
explained or defined and not applied to the question.
Like Question 5, eleven candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.41. 
Prose Fiction
Question 7
This was a very popular question; approximately, one-third of the candidates attempted it. What some candidates 
missed was the fact that it was not an absolute statement. The question asked for the extent to which the 
statement was true. Superior responses tied the authors‘ technique with the thematic issue and made allowances 
for the view that friendship might not always heal. Common selections were Beka and Toysie and Billy and Kes. 
Thirty-one candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for the question was 18.68 
Question 8
Question 8 required a comparison of the authors‘ portrayal of hope. This was not a popular choice. This may 
have been because in making the comparison explicit, the question asked for more than mere discussion or 
narration. Weaker attempts focused only on hope, with little or no knowledge of tragedy. Again, candidates who 
-8- 
chose Beka Lamb and A Kestrel for a Knave had strong arguments that provided fruitful discussions either via 
characters or writer‘s craft or a combination of both. 
While this question was not popular, many of the candidates who attempted it provided some well-developed and 
superior essays. This question produced the highest mean for the entire examination, that of 19.22. Two 
candidates scored full marks. 
Question 9
This was the least popular question in this section. The question specifically focused on narrative techniques 
(signalled by ―Show how the writer presents …‖). Candidates, for the most part, resorted to storytelling of 
instances of injustice in selected texts. However, superior and good responses focused on the use of contrast as in 
race, class and gender; symbols such as the church, school, the teacher, David’s father; tone as in the satirical 
ways in which fanaticism is explored in The Chrysalids, for instance, and setting in the texts, to indicate instances 
of injustice. 
Questions 8 and 9 had direct reference to writer‘s craft and is may be why they were not popular among 
candidates. 
This mean for Question 9 was 15.00. No candidate scored full marks (35) or even 34. Four candidates achieved a 
score of 33. 
Question 10
Question 10 was one of the more popular choices; approximately one third of the candidates attempted it. The 
question focused on the difficulties faced by a major character in search of personal freedom. Narration was 
popular but stronger responses acknowledged the political context of colonialism in Beka Lamb for instance, and 
its impact on the personal. Those who selected The Hummingbird Tree discussed for instance, the stranglehold of 
class, race and gender. Responses for The Chrysalids discussed David’s struggle to be free from his tyrannical 
and fanatical father. Billy’s entrapment in his social class and dysfunctional home environment and low 
expectations from society, were common responses for those who selected A Kestrel for a Knave. 
Two candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 16.64. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice limits the 
depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer the 
question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this a genre-specific 
examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the analytical 
element in essays. 
-9- 
4. Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen vocabulary, 
grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find opportunities to give small 
writing tasks (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students such as 
 exercises which target introductory paragraphs 
 finding textual evidence to develop one point. 
5. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the movie version, for 
instance). 
6. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area.
7. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, teachers are
encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the language to describe, 
explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening and speaking. 
8. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument of the 
writers‘ style, but is also the ‗lived‘ experience. Literature can help students to explore, question, form 
judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what is 
sometimes captured in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2011
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The historic first January sitting of the English B examination exposed a diverse range of responses from a 
population of candidates that ranged from 11–59 years. Candidates‘ responses suggested that they enjoyed the 
encounter with set texts and responded with the range of organizational thinking styles which they either naturally 
developed or were schooled into.
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two components —
Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing —
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of ten optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section A
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section B
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates must choose two 
appropriate poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer 
one question from this section. 
Section C
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English. These texts are specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
The overall performance in the January 2011 English B examination was quite satisfactory and it is envisaged that 
performance will improve even further as candidates‘ performance on Profile 2 — Poetry — improves. 
-3- 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
Candidates‘ performance in Paper 01 was good. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 29.25; 
in Profile 2, Poetry, 20.29; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 22.98. The weakest performance was in Poetry. 
Candidates demonstrated an excellent grasp of the principles of literary appreciation and added their personal and 
heartfelt responses to the excerpts/texts in the three genres. The personal involvement from candidates was 
evident in their responses which seemed to range from precocious to a mature analysis of the texts and the 
questions. 
Question 1
Overall the question was handled well and quite a few candidates earned full marks. Generally, the more able 
candidates were able to access marks which ranged from 11 to 15 (15 marks being the maximum). Those who did 
not achieve maximum score either misinterpreted the question or did not give full enough responses. Candidates 
are encouraged to read extracts in their entirety instead of focusing on one or two words to base their responses. 
Most of the candidates were able to earn one of the two marks allocated to Part (a). This question assessed 
candidates‘ comprehension of the incident taking place. There was some misinterpretation. Some candidates saw 
the event as a political rally or a protest (making reference to words like ‗minister‘ and ‗commissioner‘). Others 
chose to highlight and interpret the word ‗gay‘ as having homosexual connotations or that there was just a march, 
missing the carnival-like event. 
Part (b), which assessed candidates understanding of the use of dramatic techniques, produced some very good 
responses. However, like Part (a), there was evidence of misinterpretation. For example, Brock‘s statement about 
getting an exorcist or using bullets was taken to mean that he was not in favour of the tramping. Some candidates 
gave only one and not two ways in which the playwright showed that Brock does not share the view of the others. 
Others missed the dramatic technique of the stage device. They indicated, for example, that Brock leaves the 
stage. There were some candidates who merely quoted lines from the extract instead of using the lines to show 
the manifestation. 
Part (c) (i) required candidates to use the words ‗how undignified‘ to show what they revealed about Stickwell‘s 
attitude. This part of the question was not well done. Some candidates responded to the behaviour of Stickwell to 
the marchers instead of using Stickwell‘s words to evaluate or assess his attitude to the festivity of the marchers. 
Others tried to define the word ‗undignified‘. The better prepared candidates were awarded full marks for 
accurately indicating that Stickwell was being condescending, snobbish and was generally disgusted by the 
-4- 
actions of the Tramping Man and his supporters. The second part of this question, (c) (ii), was reasonably well 
done, although there was evidence of misinterpretation, possibly because candidates did not understand the word 
‗imply‘. The expected response for this question required candidates to capture the fact that Stickwell did not trust 
Brock and that he was not surprised by his action. There was some confusion in the assumption candidates made 
that he was making reference to the Minister, when he was actually speaking about Brock. Some candidates 
made statements like, ‗He told the Minister not to go to the dance, but he would not listen.‘ In a few instances, 
candidates felt that Brock was the same person as the minister. 
Part (d) (i) required candidates to state one difference between the government officials and the Tramping Man 
and his supporters. Generally, responses should have suggested that the government officials seemed stiff and 
unmoved by the music, whereas the Tramping Man and his supporters seemed alive and energetic. One of the 
major areas of misinterpretation for Part (d) (i) was that instead of showing the difference between the 
government officials and the Tramping Man, candidates looked at differences among the government officials and 
their positions. Part (d) (ii) required candidates to show how the playwright emphasizes the difference identified 
in Part (d) (i). Expected responses should have mentioned the dynamics between the on-stage versus off-stage 
activities (the stiff irrational abuse by officialdom versus the offstage energized, joyous, natural movement led or 
influenced by the Tramping Man). Many candidates repeated material mentioned in Part (d) (i) instead of looking 
at the importance of saying how or looking at the playwright‘s method (technique) of differentiating between both 
groups and were therefore unable to access the marks awarded for this question. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item. The onus was on the candidates to take a position then provide textual 
evidence to support the position taken. Many candidates scored full marks as they were able to support their 
claim. However, some candidates did not understand the meaning of the word ‗justified‘ and proceeded to 
contradict themselves. For example, they said the reasons for the arrest were justified yet they showed why it was 
not right for the Tramping Man to be arrested. Others restated lines to support the position taken. 
Question 2
For Question 2, Poetry, candidates seemed to identify with the issue of aging. Part (a) was fairly well done as 
most candidates understood the image being portrayed. Many candidates saw the image of the old man but few 
went further to see other things, for example, alone, quiet, hunched. 
Part (b), which assessed poetic technique, required candidates to identify the literary device and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates discussed the effectiveness of the device without identifying it and so could 
not be awarded full marks. Additionally, although the explanatory note said what Guardian was, some 
candidates creatively inferred it was a person. Effective responses identified the device as either metaphor or 
personification and suggested how the ‗drooling‘ captured the image of the newspaper slipping from Pa‘s grasp 
and the ways in which the falling newspaper and Pa‘s drooling are similar. 
Part (c) though not literary, posed some amount of difficulty for some candidates who merely connected Pa‘s 
‗silent rage‘ to his quiet surroundings or the fact that he is old. However, insightful responses made reference to 
line 5 ‗how seldom he laughed in those days‘ suggesting that Pa is angry now as he reflects that when he was 
young he did not really enjoy himself; Pa resents his own physical helplessness (evidence — his hands are no 
longer steady); ‗Pa can no longer control his thoughts‘(line 14), among others. 
Most candidates managed reasonable responses to Part (d) (i), which asked for two impressions of Pa. Some of 
the responses which were awarded full marks included: Pa was a role model; one who portrays positive attributes; 
other descriptors such as unflinching, solid, dependable, loyal, focused, and faithful. Part (d) (ii), however, posed 
a challenge for candidates who, instead of giving two words or phrases to support the impressions in (d) (i), 
-5- 
quoted entire sentences. Ideal responses mentioned ‗steady hands‘; ‗vices he declined‘ for phrases and ‗sacrifice‘, 
and ‗anchored‘ for words to support their claim. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item which proved challenging for those who said that the title was inappropriate. 
A few candidates did not commit but their responses pointed to either a positive or negative leaning. Candidates 
should be trained to take a position and to defend such a position. 
Question 3
Overall, candidates‘ responses indicated that they found the passage was manageable and interesting and within 
their experience. Part (a), which required candidates to provide two reasons why the narrator was upset was well 
done and candidates who did not earn full marks tended to ignore the instructions to confine their responses to 
paragraph one. It is important that candidates read the questions carefully to ensure that they provide the 
requirements of the question and so improve their ability to earn full marks. 
For Part (b), candidates were required to identify the literary device in a given phrase and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates did not name a device (in this case, metaphor) and others named incorrect 
devices and so did not earn the one mark for this part of the question. Additionally, some only attempted an 
explanation of the phrase and many did not know what ‗jellyfish‘ was. Those candidates who did justice to the 
question mentioned the mother‘s helpless shaking as she laughs and how the narrator feels like her mother is 
stinging her by not paying her any attention. 
Part (c), which assessed candidates‘ knowledge of irony was not well done. Many candidates did not identify the 
irony (located within the four lines given) or explain it. A complete response would have entailed the candidates 
explaining the nature of the contrast, that is, what was expected by the narrator (comfort, love, affection) versus 
what was received (being ignored by her mother) when she went home. 
Part (d) was fairly well handled. Candidates were required to indicate how the narrator felt after her mother 
confirmed she had eaten breadfruit and to support the response given. Once candidates identified the feelings, for 
example, that the narrator felt betrayed by her mother/ was distrustful of her mother/ was repulsed by her mother, 
they were able to supply the necessary evidence and were able to earn full marks. Responses which captured the 
crocodile image; the mother‘s laughter; or the mother being half in and half out the door got full marks. On the 
other hand, some candidates had difficulty providing supporting evidence. Some candidates identified the feeling 
before and not after as indicated in the question. Others did not identify the feelings but gave supporting 
quotations. 
Although Part (e) provided for reader response and allowed candidates to express their views, some were not clear 
about what they agreed or disagreed with. Quotations were cited but not enough to support a full and clear 
response to the question. Such responses did not allow candidates to earn full marks. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
1. Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for candidates to be exposed to literature. 
2. Discussing literary devices must be continued. It is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
3. Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage as a 
whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a 
thoughtful processing of the events described. 
-6- 
4. While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students offer to the 
questions. Too often, candidates‘ admissible responses to questions are inaccessible to those who do not 
share knowledge of their dialect. We therefore recommend that teachers give students the feedback on 
the Standard English translation of their correct responses to the questions. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1
Questions about the casket scenes tend to yield good responses. For this the first January sitting of the English B 
examination, five times as many candidates attempted Question 1 as against Question 2. For Part (a), which 
required candidates to describe the test set for Portia‘s suitors and the consequences of their choosing wrongly,
most candidates were able to describe the test, the types and inscriptions on the caskets. Many, however, were 
not as accurate in describing the consequences of the suitor‘s incorrect choice. 
Part (b) required some analysis of the correct selection of the caskets, that is, how the test would ensure that Portia 
married someone who truly loved her. Candidates were expected to suggest how the test was designed to sift the 
suitors by exposing those who were concerned with outward appearance, glamour and glitter as well as those who 
were arrogant and vain. This sifting would identify the one who was willing to countenance dire consequences (of 
a single life). Only the one who would be willing to look beyond the outward appearance (base lead) to inner 
qualities would be considered worthy. Although candidates mentioned Portia‘s physical attributes, many failed to 
mention the qualities of the suitors who would take such a risk. For the most part, the tendency in this part of the 
question was for candidates to gloss over the issue of outward appearance. 
-7- 
Part (c) was the most challenging to candidates. Some claimed that not enough information was given in the text 
about Shylock as a father, therefore they could not discuss him. Other candidates adopted a one-sided approach 
and did not see anything positive about Shylock. Many candidates missed the comparative element that was 
required. However, insightful responses mentioned that at heart, both fathers wanted what was best for their 
daughters (seeing that they married well) even though their methods were different. The fathers‘ attitude to wealth 
is the most obvious point of departure. Portia‘s father provides lavishly for her, whereas Shylock hoards his 
money; Portia‘s father puts her above money whereas Shylock would prefer to have Jessica dead and his jewels 
restored to him. 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and three (0.56%) of 539 candidates who 
attempted this question achieved the total score of 35. The mean for this question was 19.51. 
Question 2
Although the mercy speech is well known, this question was not a popular choice. Few candidates outlined the 
details of the speech: Shylock would be blessed if he is merciful; mercy is a mark of greatness; justice alone 
cannot lead to salvation; that if we want to be shown mercy, we must be merciful. Many candidates had difficulty 
remembering what Portia said about mercy. However, there were some insightful responses about the mercy 
shown to Shylock. Many candidates were au fait with the ‗theatrics‘ of the scene — the sharpened knife and 
Shylock‘s thirst for blood. 
The irony of the ‗merciful‘ Christians was not lost to the insightful candidates, but the details of Part (b) were 
lacking to a large extent. Gratiano‘s behaviour (his taunting of Shylock by telling him that soon he will not have 
enough money to buy cord to hang himself) and Shylock‘s reminder that these Christians were themselves 
slaveholders who treated their slaves like asses and dogs simply because they owned them, were some examples. 
Part (c), which required that candidates comment on the mercy shown to Shylock, proved to be challenging to 
many candidates. This part of the question assessed the writer‘s technique and required analytical strength from 
the candidates. If Part (b) were handled well, as in identifying the irony and inconsistencies of the Christians, 
candidates should have moved logically to Part (c). Weaker candidates merely repeated information used to 
respond to Part (b). Ideally, the use of dramatic irony and an interrogation of ‗mercy‘ (which is bitter-sweet) 
would have been sufficient for Part (c). This part of the question is essentially reader response and candidates 
must be confident in expressing their informed judgment. 
While none of the 99 (12%) candidates who attempted this question scored full marks, one candidate scored 34. 
The mean for this question was 12.61. 
Fences 
Question 3
Almost an equal distribution of candidates attempted the questions set on Fences. The text is widely known, and 
for Question 3, so were the ways in which Troy wronged his family. Although candidates were quite competent in 
discussing the ways in which he wronged Rose and Cory, some candidates were not able to discuss the ways in 
which Troy wronged Gabriel. Expected responses for the ways in which Cory wronged Gabriel included how he 
used Gabriel‘s disability money to fix his home; how he forced Gabriel to live with Miss Pearl and how he signed 
the committal papers to get some of his money. 
For Part (b), candidates were required to show how forgiveness and hope are presented dramatically in the final 
scene of the play. Most candidates demonstrated awareness of forgiveness and hope, but too many could not 
discuss how this was dramatically presented. Among the expected responses were: what Raynell represents (as 
-8- 
the new generation); Raynell‘s garden and the attendant symbolism; Raynell and Cory singing the blues; the 
presence of all whom Troy offended at the funeral; Gabriel‘s dance, among many others. 
Approximately 99 (11%) candidates attempted this question. The highest score achieved in this question was 32. 
The mean for this question was 17.86. 
Question 4 
Part (a) required candidates to discuss how Rose nurtured Troy, Cory and Raynell. Candidates‘ responses 
revealed that they were knowledgeable about Rose, and the ways in which she nurtured Troy, Cory and Raynell. 
Part (b) of the question was not handled as well. Candidates were required to show how Rose was both hurt and 
blessed in her relationship with Troy. Candidates‘ treatment of the subject was one-sided. Many were able to 
show how Rose was hurt, but were not able to do a similar treatment on how she was blessed. Candidates could 
have presented her as being ‗blessed‘ in the following ways: Troy gave her a roof over her head; he brought home 
his salary; seemed to have been faithful for a while; and was affectionate to her. 
Candidates, who adopt a dualistic interpretation of characters and situations as good or bad, black or white, 
generally see less subtlety and complexity than their open-minded peers. 
Poetry 
Question 5
Slightly over one-third of the candidates attempted Question 5 as against Question 6. Part (a) required candidates 
to describe two poems in which Nature and technology are in conflict. While candidates were able to describe the 
details in some degree, there was not enough about the conflict between Nature and technology. A few candidates 
were more accurate in their description by pointing to the contrast. Merely mentioning the deer on the winding 
road in ―Travelling through the Dark‖ or the presence of the Spaniards in the natives‘ territory in ―From the 
Emigrants‖, did not point sufficiently to the conflict between Nature and technology. This portion of the question 
demanded knowledge of the texts and it would appear that this pre-selection was not advantageous to candidates 
as many seemed to be more conversant with ―Travelling through the Dark‖ than ―From the Emigrants.‖
Part (b), which required candidates to identify a poetic device in each poem used to comment on the impact of 
Nature and technology and comment on the effectiveness proved to be challenging to the candidates. Even when 
devices were correctly identified, candidates failed to link them to the question (in this case the impact of 
technology on Nature) or comment on their effectiveness. 
Part (c) was for the most part, reader response. However, the ‗message‘ each poet is presenting through the 
portrayal of Nature and technology should be grounded in textual evidence. The deer in ―Travelling through the 
Dark‖ is supposed to be in its habitat and it is man‘s incursion that puts both deer and people in danger. The fate 
of the fawn is at the mercy or whim of man. Painful decisions are necessary for survival. Columbus‘ sojourn to 
the West Indies in ―From the Emigrants‖ had disastrous consequences. His encounter with the natives was an 
unequal one. Pitted against the bullets, spears and sea power, the natives did not stand a chance. Technology 
might win. 
This question was not well done. The highest mark earned was 28 and the mean mark was 9.33. Two hundred and 
forty-four candidates attempted this question. 
-9- 
Question 6
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name and discuss the theme of death. Part (a) asked 
candidates for a description of the situation that caused the speaker to think about death and Part (b), the reaction 
of each speaker to the encounter with death. For Part (b), many candidates confused the speaker and the poet. Part 
(b) was an opportunity for comparison of speakers, for instance, in terms of how the encounter with death is 
treated. All poems on the syllabus could have been used, although some clearly provided more ‗mileage‘ than 
others. Part (c) was as usual the most challenging as most candidates were not able to discuss the effectiveness of 
the poetic device even when correctly identified. The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in the 
discussion, there was the tendency to divorce the effectiveness of the device from the theme of death, indicated in 
the stem of the question. 
Three of the 542 candidates who attempted Question 6 earned 33 of the 35 marks. While this question did better 
than Question 5 with a mean of 14.71, a better performance in the Poetry Profile is desired. 
Prose Fiction
The comparative questions on West Indian and non-West Indian novels offer candidates the opportunity to 
explore themes, concepts and narrative techniques which can often allow them to see levels of meaning and 
understanding while they are discussing the question. The outstanding candidates demonstrate these flashes of 
insight as they approach the question from unique angles, interpreting power, or dreams and aspirations, or 
friendship in less obvious, but perceptive ways and using the comparison, whether stated or implied, to call 
attention to fresh ways of understanding. Competent scripts generally take the safe, literal, concrete interpretation 
of the question and the text and often merely demonstrate an accurate and appropriate reading of the storyline. 
Candidates will find greater enjoyment and fascination with the novels if they are encouraged to see the 
connotative and symbolic implications of the texts, a character like Beka or David or Billy or Alan as symbolic of 
a group or age or nation. That leap in understanding could make the most concrete, basic reader of a text offer 
exceptionally creative interpretations to these questions. There were several examples in this cohort where these 
gems were revealed. 
On the other hand, inappropriate use of texts resulted in reduction of marks. Some candidates were not conversant 
with the current texts or with the details necessary to answer the questions. In some instances, they lost marks 
(many times 50% of the content) because they used drama texts such as The Merchant of Venice or Fences to 
answer questions which are clearly genre-specific. Some candidates used popular fiction such as Harry Potter. In 
other instances, texts not on the prescribed list for Prose Fiction, such as A Cow Called Boy or old CSEC texts 
such as Green Days by the River and To Kill a Mockingbird were used. It was not unusual to find instances where 
candidates used their creativity to write their own life stories to answer the questions. In the latter case, no marks 
were awarded for that effort. 
Far too often the comparative nature was missing from the discussion. Many candidates merely narrated the texts, 
disregarding the question. 
Question 7
Approximately 212 (26%) of the candidates attempted this question. Candidates were required to discuss how a 
major character in one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel is oppressed by the power of another person 
or institution and struggles against oppression in a bid for freedom. Most candidates demonstrated knowledge of 
the characters who wielded power, but those who were powerless proved somewhat troublesome. Additionally, 
the second part of the question which focused on the struggles in the bid for freedom was often left undone. 
Candidates must ensure that they respond to all the areas of the task in order to access the marks. 
-10- 
While no candidate earned full marks for this question, one candidate scored 34. The mean mark for this question 
was 17.42. This was the highest mean in the section. 
Question 8
Question 8 was the most popular question for Prose Fiction. Approximately, 365 (45%) of the candidates 
attempted this question. Candidates were required to select a major character in a West Indian and and non-West 
Indian text who dreams of a better life and discuss the struggles that character goes through in attempting to make 
those dreams come through. Whereas candidates were proficient in articulating the dream of the major characters, 
they were not so sure-footed about the struggles. Similar to Question 7, candidates must ensure that they can 
competently address all aspects of the question before selecting it. 
While no candidate earned full marks for this question, one candidate scored 33. The mean mark for this question 
was 14.99, approximately, the same as Question 7. 
Question 9
Approximately 135 (17%) of the candidates attempted this question. Candidates were required to discuss the 
extent to which the statement ‗A good friend is better than money‘ applies to a major character in one West Indian 
and one non-West Indian novel. This question clearly demonstrated that candidates are quite knowledgeable of 
the content of the texts. They, however, displayed very little knowledge in critical analysis of the text and the 
question. 
Admirably, two candidates were able to earn the highest score of 35. The mean for this question was 15.16. 
Question 10
This was the least popular question in this section. It was attempted by approximately 95 (11%) of the candidates. 
The focus of this question was explicitly the writers‘ craft and many shied away from it. Some candidates who 
attempted it were able to make connections to the titles and texts; many simply narrated the stories or 
reconstructed the lives of the major characters. The writers‘ craft was not addressed and in many instances 
misunderstood. 
One candidate earned the highest mark of 35. The mean for this question was 10.25. It was the lowest mean for 
the section. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, Questions 5 
and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 7–10 (Prose Fiction). 
2. Candidates need to know that 2011 is the final year of the cycle for the May/June examinations and 
January 2012, for the January examinations. Knowledge of the revised syllabus is necessary. Candidates 
need to select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus to study for the May/June 2012 Examination 
for English B. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2011 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) examination in English B consists of two components — 
Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — 
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates’ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination.
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from each section.
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section.
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the other question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination.
The 2011 examination was the final May/June sitting of this cycle of texts. The January 2012 English B 
examination will see the completion of this cycle. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage.
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive
 Awareness of the interaction among characters
-3- 
There was a slight decline in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. 
The mean scores for Paper 01 for the period 2009–2011 in the table below show the trends in performance.
Mean Scores for the Period 2009–2011 
Paper 01 2009 2010 2011
DRAMA 7.02 11.00 10.22
POETRY 4.9 10.49 8.32
PROSE FICTION 8.43 7.47 8.09
It is noted that while performance declined when compared with that of 2010, performance was still better than 
that of 2009 for Drama and Poetry and consistent for Prose Fiction. 
Question 1: Drama
Nine hundred and fifty-five (4.90 per cent) of the candidates scored full marks on this question. This question 
tested knowledge of the difference between mere comprehension of the extract and awareness of genre and craft 
in the shaping of the extract. Teachers may consider the impact when, in preparation for the examination, students 
are not encouraged to master the art of answering questions in full sentences to ensure that they can get to the 
heart of the answer easier and to ensure that all parts of the question are addressed. 
Most candidates were able to score the full marks for Part (a), which indicates, happily, that teachers are paying 
closer attention to the structural elements of the genre. Responses to Parts (b), (d) and (e) indicate that some 
candidates are experiencing difficulty in drawing reasonable and supportable inferences from onstage events and 
character actions and motives. This central skill in literary study should be emphasized by teachers. A few 
candidates in their responses to Part (b) interpreted ‘relationship’ as marital, ignoring the literary use of the term. 
Some candidates erroneously felt that they had to use words from the text to describe Harold’s tone. One 
disappointing aspect of the response to Part(c) which focused on how Erma builds up suspense was that less than 
one third of the candidates provided an explanation; many candidates merely offered a summary of Erma’s 
actions. The candidates who offered an explanation were oftentimes able to score full marks. 
More than one third of the candidates earned full marks for Part (e) which required them to suggest a title for the 
extract. Candidates displayed their creative imagination in the wide and varied offering of titles and their 
rationales, based on a sensitive reading and response to the events in the extract. 
The mean score was 10.32 out of 15. 
Question 2: Poetry
Thirty-six (0.18 per cent) candidates scored full marks on this question. Most candidates earned full marks for 
Part (a), as they were able to identify the two signs, from the specified lines, which showed that someone had 
died. Most candidates were able to identify one image from the lines specified to answer Part (b), but had 
problems commenting on the effectiveness, as only approximately 25 per cent of the candidates gained full marks 
for this part of the question. For Part (c) (i), some candidates instead of making the connection with a minister of 
religion, inappropriately associated the ‘minister’ with a politician. Other candidates ignored the clues of the 
minister as presented in the poem and superimposed their expectations of his role as ‘provider of comfort,’ which, 
unfortunately, was not evident in the poem. 
-4- 
Candidates provided the evidence of something ‘horrible taking place’ for Part (c) (ii), but did not explain the 
horror. Approximately 25 per cent of the candidates gained full marks for this question. Responses to Part (d) 
indicate that teachers are prioritizing poetry as an oral medium, meant to be spoken and heard. Unfortunately, 
candidates had problems spelling words like ‘rhyme’ and ‘rhythm’. 
Many candidates misinterpreted Part (e) as they sought to explain the lines specified in the question, rather than 
identifying and commenting on the speaker’s feeling in those lines. Less than a third of the candidates earned full 
marks for Part (e), and few captured the cynicism, disbelief or irony that emerge from a sensitive reading of the 
poem, without the interference of the cultural experience of the reader. 
Teachers should guide students to focus attention on the poem itself, notwithstanding the need to draw on 
personal experience to frame an introduction to the experience of the poem. Ultimately, the poem itself may offer 
a different experience than what is expected, and students should be encouraged to confront that reality. 
Examiners suggest that teachers will continue to improve their students’ competence in poetry appreciation by:
• Allowing students to hear and recite poems and respond orally to what makes them appreciate the poem. 
• Teaching students how devices are used in poetry, beyond their ability to identify the devices. 
• Expanding students’ vocabulary of feeling words — for tone, mood and characters’ emotions which are 
inferred.
• Helping students to gauge the extent of content required for an answer by the marks allocated. 
The mean score was 8.32 out of 15. 
Question 3: Prose Fiction
Two hundred and eight (1.07 per cent) candidates scored full marks on this question. Most candidates were able 
to identify the mood for Part (a), but less than half of them indicated how the writer created the mood. 
Approximately the same number of candidates was able to earn full marks in Part (b) which required them to 
explain how the sentence, I had not expected to see him introduced a shift in the mood of the passage. Most 
candidates were able to identify the dialect as the feature which suggested that the passage was set in the 
Caribbean as required for Part (c), but for Part (d), candidates found it increasingly difficult to earn the four marks 
for explaining two ways in which the writer builds tension. Approximately 15 per cent of the candidates earned 
the maximum mark for Part (d). For Part (e), approximately 50 per cent of the candidates were able to earn one 
mark for a reason the narrator’s response to Mr Johnson was different from that of his friend. Responses to Part 
(e) (ii) demonstrated that only one-third of the candidates were able to capture and explain how Mr Johnson’s 
behaviour made the passage humorous because of his careful entanglement of the boys in their own tale. 
It is instructive that Question 1, Part (c), Question 2, Part (c) ii and Question 3, Part (d), which all test candidates’ 
ability to explain the writer’s technique, demonstrate a similar distribution or spread of marks. Teachers who are 
able to have students master the concept of the author deliberately manipulating the language and form of the 
genre to influence the feelings and thoughts of the reader or audience can be assured of excellent results. If 
teachers take this approach to the study of the set texts, candidates of the examination will have been prepared for 
the demands of Paper 01 where they can display their application of these competencies. 
The mean score was 8.09 out of 15.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage or poem as 
a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a 
thoughtful processing of the events described. Teachers need to help students expand that notion to embrace the 
more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in literature and life.
While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers/instructors are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions, to the dialect responses that students offer to the questions. 
-5- 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful attempts to 
have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and emotional 
responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation 
to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions, is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the 
study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 23 of the syllabus): 
(i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
(ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
(iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism
(iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses
(v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the shaping 
of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02
(vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text
(vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice
Question 1
The Shakespeare questions yielded 65 per cent of the total responses for the drama section. Most candidates 
demonstrated good knowledge of the text but some could not apply this knowledge to the question. For Part (a), 
candidates were asked to describe the love relationship of one pair of three pairs given. The most popular choice 
was Portia and Bassanio. Some candidates did not describe the relationship but gave summaries of the encounters 
between these couples. A few candidates ignored the instruction and discussed all three couples. Part (b) required 
a discussion of the obstacles encountered by the lovers in this relationship but candidates tended to identify the 
obstacles only and not show how these affected the relationship. Candidates did better in discussing the suspense
and disguise in Part (c). Here is a brief excerpt of a response that addresses Part (c), dealing with the element of 
disguise: 
The element of disguise is employed by Shakespeare to help overcome an obstacle but is also conveyed as an 
obstacle. Even Jessica’s conversion to Christianity can be seen as a ‘disguise’. She must hide her true identity for 
the sake of love. Although Lorenzo’s love is boundless, she must alter some characteristics for their relationship. 
This shows that true love always has some form of difficulty. 
There were a few candidates who confused irony and dramatic irony. 
Twenty-one candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 16.07 out of 35. 
-6- 
Question 2
This was the least popular drama question as only 290 candidates attempted it (1.48 per cent). This question 
focused on the minor characters Solanio and Salarino and their role in the play. Candidates readily accounted for 
the events in this scene and enjoyed relating its comic elements, as was required for Part (a), but Part (b) which 
asked for a discussion of the dramatic effect of this scene was not adequately handled. Expected responses 
included the humour created by the boys trailing Shylock; prophetic irony in Solanio’s remark that Antonio might 
suffer if he fails to keep his bond; the tension and suspense generated by their vivid descriptions/recounting and
how these characters functioned as the play’s ‘newspaper’ in dispensing the gossip. Part (c) required a connection 
of this scene to the play as a whole and suggested responses included the ways in which Solanio and Salarino
contributed to the economy of the drama since they reported on offstage events; their newspaper role (giving 
news on the Rialto); their support for Antonio and how they advanced the theme of money, a crucial theme in this 
play. 
One observation worth mentioning is that a few candidates confused the named scene with Act 3, Scene 1, in 
which Shylock appears onstage and questions Solanio and Salarino. This scene comes shortly after the one 
indicated in the question. 
No candidate scored full marks on this question. The mean for the question was 13.19 out of 35. 
Fences
Question 3
Twice as many candidates did Question 3 than Question 4. Writer’s craft is important in appreciating Wilson’s
(the playwright) expectations of the audience through the ways in which the feelings and thoughts about Troy are 
portrayed. Although candidates relished discussing Troy, many of them confused the thoughts with the feelings in 
Part (a) of the question. It was heartening though to see that candidates were aware that this head/heart dilemma 
could yield answers that were for, against or just ambivalent. Popular responses about the audience’s feelings
about Troy showed how he was presented at the beginning of the play as likeable, witty, engaging, romantic, and 
how Bono saw him as a leader (for the positive slant) and how he was presented as selfish/self-centred, as in his 
infidelity and treatment of Cory and Gabriel (for the negative slant). An ambivalent position saw Troy’s portrayal 
as one that evoked both sympathy and contempt from the audience. Responses about the audience’s thoughts 
about Troy would demonstrate how information about him is sequenced in the play (the good things first); how 
the audience learns about his difficult past; and having learned all of this, how do we now judge him? Part (b), 
being reader-response (giving their final opinion of Troy, with justification), yielded very good responses. Here is 
an example:
Troy is very unjust in his decision with not allowing Cory to go to college and live out his dream of playing 
football. Troy, however, uses his past failures to prevent his own son’s dream from happening. This was seen as 
selfish as he built a fence around Cory to keep society out and in the end it actually locked Cory out of his home. 
Troy is hardworking and is not pleased that he could not complete purchasing his house if it was not for money 
that was given to his brother Gabriel who was injured in the war. I don’t however blame Troy to some extent 
because he had a rough childhood. He was not given the emotional love as a child so he finds it hard to give this 
type of love to his son. His being locked up for fifteen years also shows how black men were unjustly treated and 
this has helped to drive an arrow of bitterness in Troy’s heart. 
Four candidates (0.09 per cent) scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.40 out of 
35. 
-7- 
Question 4 
Part (a) required knowledge of the pasts of Troy, Bono and Lyons. Candidates were very familiar with Troy’s past 
but had difficulty finding textual evidence for Bono and Lyons. Consequently, many of them lapsed into 
narration. Part (b) required discussion on one of these characters and demonstration of how Wilson shows the 
effect of the past on this character throughout the play. Some candidates discussed all three characters. Part (c), 
which asked for the issues about black men that Wilson was highlighting, caused much uncertainty as candidates 
seemed to have problems with the word/concept issues. However, some candidates offered acceptable responses 
such as their roles in the family (as in husband/wife relationship, parent/child relationship); role in the
community; how they perceive manliness, their attitude to and involvement in sports, and their attitude to racism. 
Four candidates (0.18 per cent) scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.97 out of 
35, the highest mean for the drama section. 
Poetry
Question 5
This question dealt with the portrayal of death in the poems “Traveling Through the Dark” and “Epitaph”. Part 
(a) asked candidates to describe what happens in each poem. Although most candidates were able to describe the 
events, in many instances key details were omitted, and, in some instances, candidates ‘invented’ details to fill the 
textual gap (as in the speaker hitting the deer or the white folks cheering the hanging body). On the whole, 
candidates were more comfortable with “Traveling Through the Dark” than “Epitaph” and it was quite common 
to have candidates confusing another poem on the syllabus, “The Lynching” with “Epitaph.” 
Part (b) required a discussion of the speaker’s attitude in each poem. Some candidates were cognizant of the 
complexity of the speaker’s attitude in “Traveling Through the Dark” as he is sensitive to the unborn fawn but 
practical in terms of adopting a philosophical attitude about death as he remains unswerving in his journey (which 
could also be a fitting metaphor for the road of life). The speaker’s attitude in “Epitaph” allows for more than one 
reading and insightful candidates argued either for one of anger or that of detachment. 
For Part (c), candidates were expected to identify and discuss one poetic device that each poet uses to capture the 
reader’s attention or create an emotional response in the reader. Many candidates identified a device but failed to 
provide textual evidence to support the submission. It was common to have devices selected at random that could 
not be connected to the poems. Some candidates were unable to show how the device evoked a particular 
response. Generally, it proved quite challenging for some candidates to discuss the devices and link this 
discussion to reader-response. This example infuses the device and the effect:
The poetic device of personification is used greatly to create an emotional response in the reader. The poet gives 
nature human qualities to gain sympathy from the reader and also to create suspense. When the reader sees the 
phrase, “nature listened”, we are made to feel the importance of the decision and the weight that must have been 
upon the persona. That the “car aimed its headlights” shows that technology, represented by the car, was ready 
to move on and move ahead.
Two candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 14.80 out of 35. 
-8- 
Question 6
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose two suitable poems from the prescribed list 
to answer the question set. Candidates seemed to have a strong preference for this kind of question as it yielded 
67 per cent of the responses. Model answers named two appropriate poems and described who/what is admired 
for Part (a). Popular choices were “Richard Cory”, “Coolie Mother” and “For My Mother (May I Inherit Half Her 
Strength)”. Part (b) asked for an identification and discussion of a poetic device in each poem showing this 
admiration. Discussion of the device was not a strong point for average candidates. The reader-response aspect of 
the question, Part (c), required candidates to supply textual support for a position as to which presentation of 
admiration is more appealing of the two poems. Some candidates merely repeated lines from the chosen poem to 
validate their claim. 
For this response, an encouraging number of candidates dealt well with Part (b) which asked them to show how 
the poet used a technique to present admiration. Many candidates were able to identify appropriate devices and 
explain how they were used by the poet to convey a sense of admiration. References to repetition in Goodison’s 
“For My Mother (May I Inherit Half Her Strength)” and McDonald’s “God’s Work” and personification in King’s 
“A Contemplation Upon Flowers” were well handled by candidates. Average candidates were only able to 
identify the devices and provide a limited explanation of the connection between the devices identified and the 
poet’s message. Weaker candidates for the most part only referred to the device without illustrating its relevance 
to a clearer understanding of admiration.
 Many candidates were able to give qualified justification regarding why they found one poem more appealing in 
its presentation of admiration than the other as required for Part (c). It was a delight to see many candidates 
drawing on their own experiences, and those issues in their society, such as strong mothers who sacrifice much 
for their children, to bolster their arguments for why an issue resonates with them. Weaker responses to this 
section were from candidates who appeared to lack the skills of argument and did not know the poems well. 
Twenty-three candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 17.57 out of 35. 
Prose Fiction
Question 7
This question on empathy gave candidate the opportunity to be objective and to evaluate through analysis, the 
phrase to what extent. The word encourage also suggests the ability of the writer to persuade the reader through 
his/her narrative technique. This question also asked the reader to personalize the experience of the major 
character in the texts chosen. Overall, some level of synthesis was expected in order for candidates to do well. 
Only 24 per cent of the candidates attempted this question and many ignored to what extent and gave very general 
submissions which did not fully integrate the content, writer’s style or their own personal responses. Many 
candidates did not concentrate on major characters and far too many used ‘sympathy’ and ‘empathy’
interchangeably. 
Teachers need to concentrate a bit more on teaching point of view. 
Ten candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for the question was 16.15 out of 35. 
-9- 
Question 8
This question asked candidates to identify from each text, a major character and to show how the exposure to love 
changed him/her or impacted him/her positively or negatively. Many candidates had challenges in saying how
love changed the character. There was a heavy concentration on romantic love as against other types, for 
example, parental love and love between friends. Those who chose A Kestrel for a Knave spoke mainly about 
Billy and the hawk and very few about Billy and Mr Farthing. Some candidates had problems navigating the 
race/class dimension of the relationships in The Hummingbird Tree. Although traditionally love is a popular 
choice, only 23 per cent of the candidates attempted this question. 
No candidate scored full marks. The mean for this question was 16.10 out of 35. 
Question 9
This question, which focused on the roles of mothers, proved to be the most popular question in the prose section, 
with almost 37 per cent of the candidates attempting it. Appropriate coverage of this question would have 
included the mothers’ actions and influence, and how this influence shapes the characters and events. How the 
mothers’ role contributes to any theme/issue in the texts and how the writers’ technique help to show the mothers’ 
role would also constitute part of the discussion. Far too many responses merely listed the litany of woes about 
Billy’s mother, for example, or in other instances, discussed the behaviour of the women in the texts. 
The responses to this question were also affected by candidates’ poor choice of characters in the texts as some 
characters were never developed enough for students to write much about their roles. Another concern is the 
perennial one of candidates not mindful that they are comparing and contrasting. While it is expected that 
candidates will focus on the issues in the question for each text above anything else, it is also good practice for 
them to demonstrate an awareness of how the novelists treat similar issues and to use the language that indicates 
this awareness. The very good responses not only showed a grasp of both issues of the mothers’ role and their 
influence on others but drew attention to the similarities or differences in the treatment of such issues. 
Teachers are being asked to pay attention to having students adduce support for points they make as far too many 
of them make points without giving adequate support from the text. Good responses for this question clearly 
identified the issues, supported them well from the text, argued coherently and demonstrated an awareness of the 
comparative nature of the question. Weaker responses, for the most part, narrated without paying much attention 
to the skills demanded. 
Five candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.86 out of 35. 
Question 10
This was the least popular question, with only approximately 15 per cent of the candidates attempting it. To 
examine enclosed spaces is to see whether the characters are freed or shackled in the process. Many candidates
did not consider the longing for freedom on the part of the entrapped. Flexible interpretations of entrapment went 
beyond the literal. Average responses were limited to physical spaces but there were superior responses that saw 
entrapment from a metaphorical perspective and explored the psychological, social and racial spaces. 
Seven candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 20.05 out of 35, 
the highest for the prose section. 
-10- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
 Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice limits 
the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments.
 Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres, for example, using a Drama text to answer the 
question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this a genre-specific 
examination.
 The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays.
 Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen vocabulary, 
grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find opportunities to give 
small writing tasks (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students such as 
 exercises which target introductory paragraphs
 finding textual evidence to develop one point. 
 Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the movie version, 
for instance).
 Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area.
 While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and/or reading the poems, for instance, teachers
are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the language to 
describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening 
and speaking.
 Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument of 
the writers’ style, but is also ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to explore, question, form 
judgements and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what 
is sometimes captured in superior scripts.
 Candidates need to be reminded that 2011 was the final cycle of the May/June examinations and January 
2012, for the January (re-sit) examinations. Knowledge of the new syllabus (and by extension the new 
cycle) is necessary, especially in relation to text selection. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2012
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of 
three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These 
modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each 
question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short answers. Fifteen marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of ten optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from each section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type-A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. 
Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this 
section. Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type-B questions. These are questions of comparison. 
Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, 
Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, 
Question 6, candidates must choose two appropriate poems from those they have studied to answer the 
question set. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. Section C, Prose Fiction, 
consists of four Type-B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non-West 
Indian novels in English. These texts are specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function 
effectively in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
Candidates‘ performance on Paper 01 was below that of 2011. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 
1, Drama, was 8.95; in Profile 2, Poetry, 8.97; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 7.34. The weakest 
performance was in Prose Fiction. 
-3- 
Question 1 
The more able candidates (47.6%) were able to access marks which ranged from 10 to 15 (15 marks being 
the maximum). The extract seemed to have resonated with candidates and many were able to appreciate 
the humour. 
Most of the candidates were able to earn the full marks allocated to Part (a). This question asked 
candidates to identify the ―important day‖ in the extract. Part (b), comprising two parts, probed Celsus‘s 
view of himself as being ―ca-coa‖. Whereas candidates could identify two other images such as being a 
dead man or being tied up, many of them could not explain what these images suggest about Celsus‘s
condition. Acceptable responses included the feeling of hopelessness; the feeling of having no future; the 
feeling of unhappiness (going to a funeral) and the feeling of having his freedom taken away. Some 
candidates merely repeated the idea that Celsus feels he was bewitched. 
Part (c) asked for textual support for the two different attitudes to marriage presented in the extract. 
Candidates rightly understood that the comparison lay between Celsus and Mr Jack but many could not 
name the attitude, for example, pride, on Mr Jack‘s part (his early marriage and defense of his wife‘s 
good name) and Celsus‘s fear and even resentment since he thinks that his wedding day is more in 
keeping with going to a funeral. 
Candidates were spot on in identifying one comic incident in Part d (i) but they were not as sure-footed on 
the dramatic functions of Helen‘s exit and entrance in Part (d) (ii). Many candidates could not move 
beyond the literal. Very few saw that Helen‘s exit (to get the drink) was a means of clearing the stage to 
allow Celsus and Mr Jack to become the focus of attention (taking centre stage). When she enters with the 
drink, the men are fighting so Helen‘s presence could be that she is the one to break up the fight and ease
the tension onstage. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item (suggesting a title and justifying the selection). The onus was on 
candidates to take a position then provide textual evidence to support the position taken. Many candidates 
scored full marks as they were able to support their claim. However, some candidates moved outside of 
the text. Candidates need to remember that reader-response items are always text-based. 
Question 2 
Candidates performed best on Question 2, Poetry, with more candidates earning full marks, as against 
Drama and Prose Fiction. For Part (a), candidates were able to identify two activities in the first stanza, as 
they were attuned to the crab-catching event and the reactions of the speaker and his sister Ruby. 
Part (b) asked candidates to state one difference between stanza 1 and 2 using evidence from the text. 
Some candidates confused stanzas with line numbering. Acceptable responses indicated the differences in 
time (past and present, as in Ma was alive in the first stanza but dead in the second stanza); the 
geographical location is also different (the savannah versus America and England); and the difference in 
mood (light-hearted innocence and fun as against the dislocation, decay and fear). 
Part (c) assessed poetic technique and required candidates to identify one literary device and comment on 
its effectiveness. Although candidates were provided the prompts (the lines as well as phrases for 
discussion were listed) many of them ignored the instruction and discussed all three devices, instead of 
choosing one. Many candidates were unable to name the device in ―squelching through mud‖ and even 
though some of the responses captured the sound of bare feet treading through the mud, many did not 
mention onomatopoeia. Many candidates identified the personification in ―Death long catch Ma‖ but were 
short on commenting on the personification of death. Responses discussing the inevitability of death and 
-4- 
the passage of time were acceptable. Another personification was seen in ―the house boarded up/breeding 
wasps‖. Although many candidates pointed to the decay and disuse, better responses discussed the 
absence of warmth/human presence and the fact that destructive insects have now inhabited the house. 
Candidates had a fair sense of the feelings of the speaker (he is afraid to return home; his feelings of 
guilt; and his reluctance to face the past) and Part (d) asked candidates to suggest two such feelings. 
Part (e) (i), which asked candidates to comment on the poet‘s use of the crab image, was the most 
challenging task. Responses were vague. It would appear that the word image was not easily understood. 
Acceptable responses could have included any of the following: the crab as a source of food; 
representing communal living; the mother is compared to a crab; and the idea of doubleness 
(mating/family) and singleness (absence of family). 
Part (e) (ii) was a reader-response item which only proved challenging for those who did not have 
‗strong‘ justification for providing another title for the poem. 
Question 3 
Candidates‘ responses to both sections of Part (a) demonstrated that they understood why Aunt Lissy 
slapped the boy and that they could identify an expression that showed the intensity of the slap. Most 
candidates could select a suitable image to present the relationship between Aunt Lissy and the 
pickaninnies such as herd of pickaninnies or a stork among the chicks scurrying behind Aunt Lissy in Part 
(b) but could neither determine the relationship nor comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses 
that commented on the effectiveness of the image of ―herd of pickaninnies‖ captured the idea of Aunt 
Lissy as leader who will whip the other animals into submission, and ―herd‖ reinforcing the animal 
imagery. The image of ―a stork‖ is effective as the maturing boy is seen as a maturing stork to be 
separated from the other chicks which are dependent on Aunt Lissy. Also captured here is the bird image 
through the movement of the children (scurrying) and the contrast in height and demeanour of the boy 
and the other children. Other candidates described the relationship but failed to identify the image. Some 
candidates looked at the relationship between Aunt Lissy and the boy and ignored the other children. 
Part (c) required candidates to give two impressions of the boy which are created and textual support for 
these impressions. Some candidates lost marks because they did not treat the question in its entirety. 
Some candidates mentioned the impressions but did not provide textual support while others cited 
lines/phrases from the passage but did not provide the impressions. The following are acceptable 
responses: the boy is defiant or determined because he thought of the word [Damballah] in his mind/ he 
refused to cry; the boy is independent because he thought of a time when he will be rid of Aunt Lissy when 
he is no longer under her control or his thinking of a time when he will be doing manly things. 
While most candidates were able to identify what was ―heathen talk‖ in Part (d) and were able to 
comment on Aunt Lissy‘s value system to some extent, they missed the point that she rejected her own 
roots, and was embracing instead only what was American in a bid to wipe out all references to her past. 
For Part (e), candidates were required to identify the literary device in a given phrase and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates identified the device (in this case, metaphor) but were unable to 
assess its effectiveness. Others commented on the effectiveness but did not name the device. The 
metaphor in this instance compares the confusion caused by Aunt Lissy’s instructions, warnings and 
admonitions to the cacophonous cackle of chickens. This reinforces the imagery of the hen with the 
brood of chickens. The animal imagery reinforces the fact that he does not see Aunt Lissy’s protectiveness 
as welcoming (seeing her cackle as noise in his head). 
-5- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of style. It 
is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. Some devices such as onomatopoeia 
proved problematic to many candidates. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at 
meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the performance element of the genre. 
 Teachers could assist students to dramatize sections of plays in class, for example, dramatize 
scenes and to summarize scenes to encourage recall. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to 
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
-6- 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1 
Part (a) required candidates to describe what happens in Act V, Scene I in which Portia and Nerissa 
quarrel with their husbands about the missing rings. Most candidates focused on the ring episode only, 
with no mention of others who were not directly involved in the couples‘ quarrel. Other details in this 
scene include the romantic moonlight setting with Lorenzo and Jessica, who were left in charge of 
Portia‘s house and Lancelot‘s announcement of Portia‘s pending arrival. Some candidates concentrated 
only on what happened after the wives‘ confrontation. Generally, it would appear that since this is a 
‗minor‘ scene, candidates were not sufficiently familiar with it. 
For Part (b), candidates did a fairly good job of identifying a theme emanating from this scene). 
However, some of them could not sustain the discussion to treat this theme in light of this scene. However 
insightful candidates discussed themes such as love, friendship/loyalty, money, appearance versus reality, 
power, the role of women, fidelity, and commitment. 
Part (c) asked for a discussion of two techniques Shakespeare used to entertain the audience. Appropriate 
responses would include dramatic irony (as in disguise in the courtroom scene and the ring episodes); 
pun (Gratianio’s threat to mar the young clerk’s ‘pen’); suspense (casket and courtroom scenes). 
Candidates need to be more sensitive to dramatic techniques as distinctive features of this genre. 
The total score of 35 was not achieved by any candidate. However, one candidate scored 33. The mean 
for this question was 10.42. 
Question 2 
Candidates were asked to describe the events in Act III Scene IV, when Portia tells Nerissa, ―We‘ll see 
our husbands before they think of us,‖ for Part (a). Apart from mentioning that Portia tells Nerrissa that 
they would be disguised as men and travel to Venice to meet their husbands, candidates were very short 
on details in this section of the question. Very few of them mentioned the role Lorenzo plays in this 
scene, impressing on Portia how fine a gentleman Antonio was; that he was left in charge of Belmont
while Portia takes her journey and the plans Portia sets in motion by sending her servant to her cousin 
Bellario, seeking his notes and garments. 
Part (b) required discussion of how disguise is used in one scene or instance in the play. Most candidates 
relished in the courtroom scene for the discussion of disguise. A few candidates mentioned how Jessica 
disguised herself as a boy and escaped her father’s house to marry Lorenzo. 
Commenting on the dramatic significance of disguise, (Part c), proved to be challenging to some 
candidates, who merely repeated information from Part (b). This section was open to the play as a whole, 
giving candidates full scope for discussion. Responses could have included: dramatic irony in that the 
wives (and the audience of course) know their husbands during the courtroom scene but they did not; 
Portia uses her disguise to save her husband’s friend’s life; disguise (men’s clothing) as a symbol of 
power; the advancement of the plot and development of themes; humour and entertainment. 
The following recommendations will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean texts (and 
drama as a whole): 
-7- 
 Find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even the minor scenes). 
 Dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations and discussion of scenes/excerpts. 
 Use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic techniques work. 
 Prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic techniques. 
Like Question 1, no candidate achieved the total score but one scored 33. The mean for this question was 
13.80. 
Fences 
Question 3 
Almost twice as many candidates attempted the questions set on The Merchant of Venice as against
Fences. For Question 3, Parts (a) and (b) required knowledge of what led to the specific events of Act II 
Scene IV, when Cory retorts, ―You ain‘t never give me nothing!‖ Candidates did not handle this question 
well. Events leading up to his outburst include Troy’s refusal to sign the permission papers for Cory 
which would have enabled him to be recruited to play college football; Troy’s poor parenting skills and 
lack of fatherly affection, even though he provides for his son materially; Cory’s deepening disrespect for 
Troy when he had Gabriel committed; when he had the affair with Alberta and was physically abusive to 
Ruth. 
Knowledge of the scene was important in answering Part (b) in terms of what the audience learns, such as 
the following: Rose is continuing to care for Raynell even though she is estranged from Troy; Troy is 
promoted at work and is driving but appears to be lonely as he is not so close to Bono anymore; Cory is 
hurt by his father’s unfaithfulness and exploitation of Gabriel. 
The greatest challenge was noted in Part (c) which dealt with dramatic significance. Candidates seemed to 
simply resort to telling what happened in the cited scene instead of focusing on how this scene impacts 
the play as a whole. The dramatic significance of this scene can be noted in these ways: Troy is at his 
worst here, in terms of all his relationships and this scene anticipates the hopefulness at the end of the 
play and the ways in which he will be redeemed; the culmination of the tension between father and son; 
the high energy in this scene is a fitting contrast to other quieter, humorous or even romantic scenes; 
ironically Troy is advancing at his workplace but things could not be worse at home; Cory being evicted 
is contrasted to earlier scenes when he is happily off to playing football or in the later scene, when he 
returns, smart and self-assured in his military uniform. 
The mean for this question was 11.74. The highest mark obtained for this question was 30. 
Question 4 
Parts (a) and (b) were not as problematic as the final part of Question 4. Part (a) required candidates to 
show what Rose wants Cory to understand by her statement, ―Your daddy wanted you to be everything he 
wasn‘t…‖ Candidates were expected to mention some of the many instances when Troy‘s behaviour and 
action suggested that he wanted his son to be more successful than he. Troy wanted better for Cory and 
that was why he bullied him so much; he did not want Cory to be affected as he did by racism so he 
discouraged him from football and encouraged him to further his education; he wanted Cory to be strong, 
independent and honest. 
-8- 
In seeking to respond to how Rose influences the audience‘s feelings about Troy in the end, Part (b) dealt 
with Rose‘s ability to affect the reaction of the audience in responding to Troy. Her reception of the 
family and Bono into the home gives the image of a reunited family. Rose’s response to Cory’s initial 
refusal to attend Troy’s funeral (her view that it was unthinkable that a boy could disrespect his daddy in 
this way) shows the audience that with all his faults, Troy is to be honoured and respected. Even though 
Troy had hurt people, Rose is in support of his memory and the audience believes her when she notes that 
even though Troy wasn’t always right, his intentions were good. 
Like Question 3, the highest score for this question, obtained by one candidate, was 30. The mean for this 
question was 9.08. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
Slightly under 50 per cent of the candidates attempted Question 5 as against Question 6. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the situation which caused the speaker‘s dream not to be fulfilled in ―The 
Carpenter‘s Complaint‖ and ―Dreaming Black Boy‖. For the most part, candidates were able to describe 
the situation in both poems although some responses were vague in that the former poem, the speaker‘s 
anger at being deprived of the chance of making his friend‘s casket and the latter, the racist society in 
which the speaker lived, were glossed over. 
Part (b) was reader response in that candidates were to use textual references to discuss which speaker in 
the two poems was more appealing. Candidates tended to find the boy in ―Dreaming Black Boy‖ more 
appealing (arguing that the adult carpenter in the other poem faced a different and less damaging kind of 
discrimination) but could not, in some instances, justify their position. 
Part (c) proved to be challenging and here candidates were asked to identify and comment on one poetic 
device used to explore the idea of unfulfilled dreams. For ―The Carpenter‘s Complaint‖, the most 
common submission was the simile stand up straight as a plumb-line but there are others that could be 
mentioned and discussed. The use of repetition (repeated use of the ―I‖; ―big-belly‖, ―big-shot‖, ―it hot 
me‖, ―it burn me‖) reinforces and enhances the simmering anger and resentment which boils over into 
rage. Contrast also is used to allow the reader to appreciate the passion of the carpenter, as insights are 
gained about his dead friend and the extent of the snub (depriving him of participating in the final ritual). 
Therefore, the living and the dead; the burning anger of the speaker against the recollected memory of his 
friend‘s cool demeanour (―walk/Home cool, cool, cool‖) and the one-voiced ranting of the carpenter 
versus the ‗silence‘ of his audience in the rum bar are other examples of contrast. Irony is also used in this 
poem when the carpenter mentions ―Mr Belnavis.‖ Clearly, the speaker is ridiculing this more socially 
acceptable gentleman. 
Repetition (especially of ―I wish‖) is also used in ―Dreaming Black Boy‖ and candidates made references 
to this. This refrain highlighted the speaker‘s alienation and isolation, dreams and fears. And this wishing 
deepens the pathos. Contrast could be mentioned in that the poem presents a series of contrasts between 
the boy‘s dreams and the reality of his situation. This serves to heighten the intense pain and anxiety of a 
boy whose dreams will never be realized in this racist society. Allusions are also used in this poem and 
apart from Paul Robeson, all other allusions are negative — the ―powers‖, ―hotel keepers‖, ―torch 
throwers‖ and ―plotters.‖ These negative allusions provide a contrast to the boy‘s dreams and reinforce 
the level of bigotry in the society. 
The mean for this question was 8.80. The highest score achieved for this question, by one candidate, was 
34. 
-9- 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name and discuss the theme of conflict. Part 
(a) asked candidates for an explanation of the conflict and Part (b), the reaction of each speaker to the 
conflict. All poems on the syllabus could have been used, but it was evident that some candidates were 
unprepared in their selection. Part (c) was, as usual, the most challenging as most candidates were not 
able to discuss the effectiveness of the poetic device even when correctly identified. The tendency was to 
explain and not analyse. Further, in some instances only one device was identified. If this is to be 
acceptable, the candidates must show its effectiveness (textually) in both poems. Sometimes there was 
the tendency to divorce the effectiveness of the device from the portrayal of conflict. 
This question was the only question where the total score was achieved. The mean for this question was 
12.11. 
Prose Fiction
The comparative questions on West Indian and non-West Indian novels offer candidates the opportunity 
to explore themes, concepts and narrative techniques which can often allow them to see levels of meaning 
and understanding while they are discussing the question. 
On the other hand, inappropriate use of texts resulted in reduction of marks. Some candidates were not 
conversant with the current texts or with the details necessary to answer the questions. In some instances, 
they lost marks (many times 50 per cent of the content) because they used drama texts such as The 
Merchant of Venice or Fences to answer questions which were clearly genre specific. It was not unusual 
to find instances where candidates used their creativity to write their own life stories to answer the 
questions. In the latter case, no marks were awarded for that effort. 
Far too often the comparative nature was missing from the discussion. Many candidates merely narrated 
the texts, disregarding the question. 
Question 7 
Candidates were required to discuss the extent to which the statement the desire for freedom is universal 
is applicable to a major character in one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel. Generally, 
candidates demonstrated a clear understanding of the question. However, candidates tended to write 
generally on the idea of freedom, making historical references without textual support, in some instances. 
The highest score obtained was 28. The mean for this question was 11.63. 
 Question 8 
This was the most popular question for Prose Fiction. Approximately, 50 per cent of the candidates 
attempted this question. Candidates were required to select a major character in a West Indian and non￾West Indian text who experiences challenges. For each novel, candidates had to discuss the challenges 
faced by the character. Candidates displayed their ability to identify and elaborate on a range of 
challenges from the characters‘ experiences and showed their engagement with the texts they selected. 
Some of them even selected texts which were on previous and upcoming cycles. 
The highest score obtained was 34. The mean for this question was 14.35. 
-10- 
Question 9 
This was the least popular prose question as less than 80 candidates attempted it. Candidates were asked 
to discuss how the writers help readers to sympathize with a child or young adult in one West Indian and 
one non-West Indian novel. They, however, displayed very little knowledge in critical analysis of the 
texts and the question. Many responses yielded inappropriate texts (the use of poems and plays) and this 
affected candidates‘ overall marks. 
The mean for this question was 13.37. The highest score obtained was 34. 
Question 10 
This question focused on prompting candidates to appreciate the writers‘ craft and many shied away from 
it. Some candidates who attempted it did not go much beyond discussions on the women generally and a 
few ventured to discuss the role of women in the texts. 
 
The mean for this question is 6.14. The highest score obtained was 26. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02,
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 7–10 (Prose Fiction). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the discrete nature 
of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for candidates to sharpen their 
essay-writing skills.
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of texts, 
for example, using websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Attention must be paid to all parts of questions. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
 An unusually large proportion of candidates did not attempt all three questions required in Paper 
02, largely because they were caught in the difference between the cycles of the syllabus. They 
were prepared for the June 2012 paper, but were entered for the January 2012 examination, the 
last of its cycle. This accounts for the significant decline in performance in this cycle‘s results. 
Teachers are strongly advised to note the difference in focus especially in the Prose section, the 
changes in the Drama texts and the alterations in the selected poems. The change in set texts will 
seriously handicap candidates who are not prepared. 
-11- 
 Candidates need to know that June 2012 is the beginning of the new cycle. Knowledge of the 
revised syllabus is necessary. For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative 
questions will be those set on the Short Stories. All other prose questions will be on single 
texts. Candidates need to select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus to study for 
the May/June 2012 examination for English B. 
 C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2012 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each 
mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles 
which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give 
approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for each question for a total of 60 
marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from each section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of 
the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second 
question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which they have studied to 
answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to
choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
The 2012 examination was the beginning of the new cycle of texts. There was also a change in the ratio 
of the weighting of the Papers and the addition of the short story in Paper 02. Additionally, the question 
type in the Prose Fiction section was changed from Type B to Type A. Generally, performance this year 
using the revised syllabus was quite satisfactory and it is envisaged that performance will improve in the 
next sitting.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how effectively these 
elements function in the passage. 
-3- 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
There was a decline in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. This is the first year in 
which each question was worth a maximum of 20 instead of the usual 15 marks. 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 
2010–2012: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for the Period 2010–2012 
Paper 01 2010 2011 2012
DRAMA 73.33% 68.13% 60.30%
POETRY 69.93% 55.46% 53.70%
PROSE 49.80% 53.93% 50.60%
Candidate‘s performance on Drama continues to be better than performance on the other genres. Efforts 
to improve performance in the other two genres must be undertaken in the various countries which 
register candidates for the subject. 
Question 1: Drama
Overall, 132 (0.68%) of the 19,502 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) (i) of the question tested candidates‘ ability to identify setting and Part (a) (ii) tested on-stage 
characters as opposed to characters off stage. These were very basic questions on the genre; however, 
some candidates mistakenly identified the setting as a lunchroom or some kind of eating establishment, 
instead of the police station. Students must be taught that setting could also include time (as in midday or 
lunch time). For the second part of the question, most candidates were able to identify the characters on 
stage (as against the off-stage Mrs Stevenson). 
Most candidates were able to score full marks for Part (b), which asked for two details of the impending 
murder. Part (c) posed a challenge to candidates in terms of explaining the dramatic effect of Duffy‘s 
casual manner and Mrs Stevenson‘s anxiety. Instead of focusing on the dramatic effects created, many 
candidates discussed the behaviour of the characters without saying what effect it had on the characters. 
Acceptable responses included the heightened tension created in the urgency to respond to Mrs 
Stevenson’s report; the contrast also evoked humour, in that Duffy’s action did not match the seriousness 
of the situation which Mrs Stevenson was reporting; the contrast also underscored the two characters—
Duffy’s calm and measured tone against Mrs Stevenson’s agitated and flustered speech. Full marks were 
awarded to candidates who moved from mere explanation of contrast to commenting on the effect on the 
audience. 
For Part (d) candidates were required to say how the stage directions contributed to characterization OR 
plot OR mood. This was fairly well done by some of the candidates. Some, however, merely defined 
stage directions and did not use the excerpt to answer the question. Acceptable responses included, for 
example, the instance when Duffy ‘double-takes’ when he heard that Mrs Stevenson wanted to report a 
murder (this showed his professionalism and care because he thought it was a ‘real’ murder); the 
audience experienced a brief moment of anxiety, then relief at the ironic interplay between Duffy and 
Mrs Stevenson. 
-4- 
Part (e)(i), which required candidates to identify one instance when Mrs Stevenson‘s tone of voice 
changed and the second part, a reason for this, did not pose too much of a challenge for candidates. Most 
of them cued in to the stage directions ‗trying to impress him‘; ‗relieved‘ and ‗impatiently‘ and supplied 
reasonable text-based responses to support their claims. 
Responses to Part (f), which required candidates to state what Mrs Stevenson was beginning to realize in 
lines 41–43, proved that they were able to deduce correctly, as many scored full marks for this part. Most 
candidates indicated that Mrs Stevenson is realizing that the details of the planned murder are closely 
connected to the details of her situation and therefore she may be in danger.
Candidates displayed creativity and imagination in their responses to Part (g), which required them to 
suggest a title for the scene and to justify their choices. Their suggestions were varied and their 
justifications based on a careful and sensitive reading of the extract. 
Two thousand eight hundred and eighty-five (14.75%) of the 19,502 candidates who attempted this 
question earned marks between 15–20. Only 132 (0.68%) earned the full mark of 20. The total mean for 
this question was 12.06 out of 20. This was the highest mean achieved of the three genres tested. 
Question 2 
Seventy-six (0.39 %) of the 19,495 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. For this 
question the more challenging parts for the candidates, based on their responses, were Parts (c) and (f).
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in indicating that the aim of the poet was to describe/celebrate 
the birth and achievement of Pele, the great Brazilian footballer and were able to earn the full 2 marks. 
Part (b) required candidates to comment on the effectiveness of line 3. Many candidates were able to see 
the dramatic impact of the ‗scoring‘, through the magnifying of the one word, and the overall joyous 
reaction to the victory and so earn full marks. It was disappointing to note, however, that some 
candidates did not attempt this part of the question. 
Part (c) required candidates to explain what was suggested in lines 4–5. Acceptable responses 
acknowledged the pun (sun/son) and captured the role this boy would play in his mother‘s life and the 
world at large. Many candidates focussed on the ‗sun‘ and not the ‗son‘. 
Part (d) required candidates to identify and comment on the figurative device in line 10 of the poem. For 
the most part, candidates identified the simile in Part (d) but the commentary was lacking. An acceptable 
response was the simile is effective in that it captures the fluid and graceful movement of Pele and this 
image reinforces his skill. This weakness in candidates‘ responses in addressing the effectiveness of the 
poet‘s use of a device is highlighted in most of the subject reports. Efforts to address this weakness in the 
classroom must be undertaken. 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to explain the image in lines 4–11. Here we see the image of nature 
(sun, moon, stars) and the celestial elements playing a part in honing his talent in preparing him for 
greatness. Candidates‘ responses indicated that they understood the image, the challenge was in 
expressing their ideas. 
Instead of comparing the first and last three lines in the poem, as was required for Part (f), many 
candidates explained the lines and paid little attention to similarities and differences. Acceptable 
responses included the scoring (the physical birth and the celebratory scoring); both are seen as heavenly 
accomplishments and earth shattering events; one suggests a loud deafening reaction and the other 
suggests stunned silence. 
-5- 
Most candidates did exceptionally well on Part (g), both in providing another title for the poem and using 
text-based evidence to justify their choice. 
Two thousand two hundred and forty (11.49%) of the 19,495 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 15–20. Seventy-six (0.39%) earned the full mark of 20. The mean for this question 
was 10.74 out of 20. 
Question 3 
The means for Question 3 in the table above indicate that Prose Fiction posed the most difficulty to 
candidates over the three-year period. 
While candidates were able to score full marks in several parts of Questions 1 and 2, most candidates did 
not score full marks on many of the parts of Question 3. Part (d) proved most challenging. Candidates 
had difficulty understanding the word ‗effect‘ and some ended up paraphrasing the two phrases they
selected from the three provided. Acceptable responses for ‗the river moved swiftly…‘ included the 
reinforcement of danger; ‗clothes fanning out…‘ included the sense of freedom, though short-lived, of 
floating/the look of the clothes buoyed by water; ‗shot to the surface‘, the sudden ejection/the power of 
the release. 
Candidates responded well to Part (a), which required them to identify where the incident was taking 
place and support their answer with evidence. Candidates also responded fairly well to Parts (b) and (c). 
However, these parts of the question accounted for only six (30%) of the marks. 
Of note is that some candidates stopped at Part (e) and did not turn the page (even though the instruction 
was there in capital letters) to view the remaining Parts (f) and (g) and consequently lost seven marks. 
This was an error as most of the candidates‘ responses to the question up to this point showed that they 
were doing reasonably well. This is indicative of poor test-taking strategies and teachers are reminded
that they should incorporate such strategies into their teaching of the subject. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the stimulus 
material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning 
based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. Teachers need to help students expand that 
notion to embrace the more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in Literature and life.
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers/instructors are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students 
offer to the questions. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations 
and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students‘ autonomous thought, 
bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the 
critical and creative thinking that the study of Literature is meant to engender. 
-6- 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness 
and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Questions 1 and 2, which are set on the Shakespeare text A Midsummer Night’s Dream, yielded almost 
one-half of the total responses for the drama section. Question 1 was far more popular than Question 2. 
Almost four times as many candidates attempted Question 1as against Question 2. 
This question sought to elicit from candidates, facts about any two sets of minor characters (from the 
three sets given); it further required them to identify and show dramatic situation(s) in which the two 
selected sets come together and finally, discuss the dramatic function of one set of the characters they 
described in Part (a). Answers from candidates showed extremely diverse interpretations, with the 
identification and discussion of the dramatic situation being the most challenging. This particular portion 
of the question encouraged a certain amount of latitude and candidates‘ responses embraced the approach 
of either looking at one situation which featured both sets of characters or two separate situations in 
which each pair is featured. 
Acceptable responses to Part (c) mentioned, for the characters Theseus and Hippolyta, how the court of 
Theseus and Hippolyta provided the setting for the conflict; how Theseus introduced the theme of love; 
that the pair introduced the motif of sleep and the symbol of the moon; that they represented sobriety and 
order; and that their union provided a contrast to the younger/immature couples. A discussion of the 
dramatic function of the fairies could include the idea that they represent the magical, the dreamlike; their 
intervention in the love affairs of some of the characters advance the plot; they create comedy. The 
actors/clowns provide humour through their handling of classic tragedies and their own dramatic 
production. 
-7- 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and 138 (1.2%) of the 7,059 candidates 
who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. Nine (0.13%) of these candidates earned full 
marks (35). The mean for this question was 17.55. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to describe two ways in which the elements of dream were 
used in the play; Part (b) to discuss the appropriateness of the title of the play; and finally, Part (c), to 
discuss the dramatic functions of dreams in the play. Part (a) tested the candidates‘ knowledge, 
understanding, interpretation and analysis of the concept of dreams in the play. Candidates were expected 
to link the relevance of the title to the play itself. While it was clear that some candidates knew the play 
and interpreted the question well, several had scant knowledge of the text. For those candidates, Part (a) 
lent itself to much narration and Parts (b) and (c) were handled superficially. Acceptable responses to Part 
(c), the most challenging part of the question, included that dreams are the medium by which characters 
are made to perform actions which contribute to the action of the play; dreams are linked to enchantment 
and they propel the action (Puck enchants Lysander and the events that follow); dreams become the 
explanation for strange happenings. 
Fifty-seven (3.06 %) of the 1,865 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Sixteen (0.86%) of these candidates earned full marks. It was noted, however, that more candidates 
scored zero on this question than the others in this section. The mean for the question was 15.18. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the most popular question in the drama section, with slightly over one-third of the 
candidates attempting this question. Part (a) of the question asked for a description of the relationship 
between Miss Aggy and Len (Len the child, not the adult); Part (b), a discussion of Miss Aggy and how 
her character illustrated the challenges of single parenting; and finally Part (c), how the playwright‘s 
dramatic presentation of Miss Aggy evoked different feelings from the audience. Some candidates 
concentrated mainly on Miss Aggy‘s relationship with Len with little or no reference to Len‘s relationship 
with her. Others concentrated on Len, the adult. There was also a tendency to generalize on the struggles 
of single parenting, without much textual reference. Some candidates introduced their own narratives of 
childhood experiences. Part (c) was the most challenging. Some candidates omitted this section and 
others tended to describe how Miss Aggy‘s behaviour made the audience feel. Acceptable responses to 
Part (c) included emotional responses such as, admiration (a single-mother who singlehandedly raised her 
son; a shrewd businesswoman; she sacrificed her life for her boy; she was self-made, independent; 
resentment (the way she manipulates Len; her self-hate; the way she fawned on Pastor Greaves, his 
daughter and ‗light-skinned‘ people) and other responses such as anger, exasperation. The answer lends 
itself to positive and negative emotions. 
One hundred and thirty-three (1.37%) of the 9,723 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30–35. Two (0.02%) candidates earned full marks on this question (35). This question had the 
second highest mean for the section. The mean for this question was 18.11. 
Question 4 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to state the different (opposing) views about beauty; to 
discuss how the playwright used characterization to illustrate those opposing views for Part (b), and 
sought from the candidates their impressions of this presentation (of inner and outer beauty) for Part (c). 
Most candidates seemed to have grasped the concept of beauty explored in the play through the use of
characterization. Although some were able to expound on the presentation of inner and outer beauty, 
-8- 
many were unable to give their final impressions on the play as a whole. Acceptable responses for Part (c) 
covered how the playwright explored some of the assumptions about blackness and inverted some of 
these assumptions to reinforce the idea that outside appearance could be deceiving. 
Thirty-two (3.93%) of the 814 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. No 
candidate earned full marks on this question. However, this question seemed to have resonated well with 
candidates. It had the fewest zeros for the drama section and boasted the highest mean of 18.39. 
Poetry
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were ―Forgive My Guilt‖ and ―Epitaph‖. This question reversed the 
trend in that, for this year it attracted about two-thirds of the responses. Part (a) required candidates to 
describe what happened in each poem as it related to death and memory; Part (b) to say how the speaker 
in each poem reacted to the memory of death; and for Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem 
which effectively portrayed the speaker‘s reaction to the death. Part (a) assessed candidates‘ knowledge 
of the poems by asking them to recall, assess and summarise the information. Most candidates responded 
well to this section. For Part (b), candidates were better able to discuss how the speaker reacted to the 
death in ―Forgive My Guilt‖ (grief, contrition, remorse) than in ―Epitaph.‖ In the latter, candidates 
misinterpreted the anger as indifference, not realizing that even if the death did not evoke public outrage 
at the time, now in the re-telling of the tale; the speaker could experience a kind of displaced anger 
(‗brutal sentences‘).
Part (c) which focused on devices (writer‘s craft) posed a challenge. Both poems were replete with 
similes, metaphors, personification, and imagery. Acceptable responses included appropriate 
identification of devices and such devices should make connections to the reaction to the death. These 
responses showed how each device deepened the remorse; heightened the pain and suffering; contained
the rage; and sustained the storytelling imagery. 
Two hundred and twenty-three (1.79%) of the 12,485 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30–35. Sixteen (0.13%) of these candidates earned full marks (35). The mean for this 
question was 15.32. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose two suitable poems from the 
prescribed list to answer the question set. The question asked candidates to select two appropriate poems 
that focused on the theme of love. Part (a) required candidates to describe who or what is loved; Part (b)
to discuss the effects of this love and finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem which is used 
to portray this love. Part (a) was handled well for the most part, although candidates sometimes did not 
always choose poems that they knew equally well. In this part of the question, candidates were expected 
to name the poems selected, and sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. For Part (b), candidates 
were expected to show how this love reflected, reinforced or questioned the love portrayed. Superior 
discussions mentioned whether this emotional response was wholesome and whether the overall effect 
was positive or negative. 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen to the portrayal of love. Some candidates mentioned but did 
not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify the devices. 
Ninety-five (1.44%) of the 6,616 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Ten candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 15.57. 
-9- 
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in this the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A 
questions which require close individual study of each text and not the comparative treatment of two 
novels as in former years. Songs of Silence did not seem to be a very popular text. The low popularity 
could be attributed to it being a relatively new text on the market with very little critical material available 
for teachers and students. 
Questions 7 and 8 combined were answered by fewer than 8 per cent of candidates who attempted the 
Prose Fiction section. The candidates who attempted questions on this text demonstrated for the most
part, interesting insights. Question 7 asked for a description of the father-child relationships in the 
chapters, ―A Story with No Name‖ and ―Travellers, or Fathers, or Little Fool-Fool,‖ for Part (a); a 
description of the relationship between Cudjoe Man and his daughter for Part (b); and for Part (c ), a 
commentary on what was suggested by the way the writer presented father-child relationships. 
Essentially, candidates focused on the characteristics/qualities of the relationships portrayed by the 
narrator Marlene and her father and for Part (b), a description of the relationship of Cudjoe Man and his 
daughter; essentially the gentle, caring and protective ways in which he ‗mothered‘ his mentally 
handicapped child. 
Part (c) dealt with the narrative techniques of the writer (cued by the word ‗presents‘). Again, this was the 
most challenging part of the question. Acceptable responses dealt with the two chapters and included, 
among others, the ways in which the writer, through Marlene‘s reflections, explores issues such as 
parental infidelity, single parenting, the ways in which the ‗silenced‘ in society (the most vulnerable) are 
treated, the role of fathers in the home, gossip and folklore, the innocent point of view of the young 
narrator, contrasted with the ‗knowledge‘ of the reader, the contrast presented by the naïve Marlene and 
the adult reflecting. 
Ninety-five (8.53%) of the 1,114 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Eight (0.72%) of the candidates scored full marks on the question. The mean for the question was 19.71. 
Question 8 
Parts (a) and (b) asked candidates for a description of what Marlene found strange or confusing in the 
chapters ―The Idiot‖ and ―Morris Hole.‖ Details included Marlene‘s memory of her mother‘s cautionary 
tale about pride (Pa Brown and the river); boys and their inability to spell; her experience with Ezekiel; 
the river and her experiences there; her sexuality (her budding breasts and Miss Retinella‘s insinuation); 
her confused head (―sometimes my head weave stories…‖). 
Part (c) required candidates to discuss two narrative techniques used to heighten the adolescent‘s 
confusion. The narrative techniques include the use of flashbacks, the contrast presented with the innocent 
narrator juxtaposed with the occasional adult interjections/communal voices; use of symbols, imagery and 
elements of song. 
Nineteen (5.57%) of the 341candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. Three 
(0.88%) candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.70. 
-10- 
The Wine of Astonishment
Question 9 
Part (a) sought candidates‘ response to their analysis of the relationship between Bolo and Bee; Bolo as a 
leader (one who cared for the people) and using Bolo (through characterization as a technique) to develop 
the story. For Part (a), some candidates described the characters rather than focused on the analysis of 
the relationship. However, some were insightful in mentioning how both empowered the villagers in 
different ways—Bolo through warrior-hood and Bee, through faith or spirituality. For Part (b), candidates 
tended to concentrate on instances of Bolo‘s interaction with the people rather than Bee‘s thoughts on 
Bolo and how he must have ‗read‘ Bolo‘s actions as ones which were intended to force the villagers to 
reclaim their manhood. 
While most candidates accepted that Bolo was the central character by their responses to Part (c), many 
did not treat this aspect of technique well and as such, resorted to narration. Acceptable responses should 
include Bolo‘s centrality to the novel and what he symbolizes (the traditional way of life); his centrality to 
the internal conflict in the church when he insists on the elimination of Prince; his contribution to the 
excitement and tension with the standoff with the kidnapping of Primus‘ daughters; his links with the 
major and minor characters and the status he shares with Bee. 
One hundred and five (1.33%) of the 7,902 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 
30–35. Five (0.06%) of the candidates scored full marks (35). The mean for this question was 15.14. 
Question 10 
Only 30 per cent of those candidates who attempted questions on this text chose Question 10. Candidates 
did not manage this question well and generally seemed to have a problem with the word ―ritual‖ in Part 
(c). Part (a) required candidates to make the connection that the steelband and the church (in this instance 
the Spiritual Baptist) have the same bond, the retention of African customs. They make use of music, 
singing and movement. Candidates handled Part (b) very well. They were able to grasp the reasons for 
Eva believing that the spirit has deserted the church. Part (c), which required candidates to deal with the 
significance of religious ritual in the novel was done fairly well. Some of the rituals in the novel include 
the rituals associated with the worship—the singing, shouting, dancing, bell-ringing, ‗catching the spirit‘. 
Seven (0.32%) of the 2,180 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. One 
candidate (0.05%) achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 14.24. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
The Short Story section was included in the revised syllabus for this cycle of examinations. This section 
patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, the short stories to be used 
are specified in one question and for the other question candidates choose two appropriate short stories 
from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 are, ―The Day the World Almost Came to an End‖ and 
―Mom Luby and the Social Worker.‖ Almost 60 per cent of the candidates who attempted the short story 
questions did this question. Candidates were asked to describe one humorous incident in each story for 
Part (a); indicate which story they found more interesting, with justification for Part (b); and for Part (c), 
show how the writer creates humour in the telling of these stories. Candidates found Part (a) reasonably 
-11- 
straightforward as they were able to describe a humorous event in each story. A few candidates related 
incidents that were not necessarily humorous. Part (b) sought a comparison with the cue word, ‗more‘ and 
some candidates did not earn full marks for this part of the question because in the discussion, they 
ignored or failed to acknowledge the other story. Part (c) posed a challenge in that candidates tended to 
provide evidence of humour without showing how the humour was created. Candidates are expected to 
discuss the writers‘ craft, for instance, the development of the plot with the rising crescendo and twist, 
which explained the narrator‘s exaggerated response to the booming aircraft in the first story and the use 
of satire to comment on the American welfare system in the other story. 
One hundred and ninety-one (3.46%) of the 5,523 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30–35. Thirteen (0.24%) candidates earned full marks. The mean for this question was 19.37. 
Question 12 
This question concentrated on setting and its contribution to the development of the storyline. Candidates 
were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list. In candidates‘ description of the setting in 
Part (a), many limited their responses to the physical space. However, there were some excellent 
responses, especially from stories such as ―Blackout‖ and ―To Da-Duh, in Memoriam.‖ In responding to 
Part (b), which asked for the significance of the setting to the development of the story, many candidates 
concentrated on the setting and not much on how the setting impacts each story. Part (c) was not handled
well, perhaps because candidates were not as sure about the term ―narrative element‖. Acceptable 
responses discussed elements such as irony, flashback, comparisons, suspense, and dialogue. 
Forty-two (0.09%) of the 2,174 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Two (0.09%) candidates earned full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 16.48. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice 
limits the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer 
the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this is a 
genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs and 
finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students 
to develop the required skills. 
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‗dramatic function‘ and ‗writer‘s craft‘. 
Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected words or 
plotted events for particular effects. 
-12- 
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be 
constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the 
movie version, for instance).
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, 
teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the 
language to describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained 
through listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument 
of the writers‘ style, but is also the ‗lived‘ experience. Literature can help students to explore, 
question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of 
applicability, is what is sometimes captured in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2013 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of 
three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These 
modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each 
question, candidates are required to give approximately five to eight short answers. Twenty marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 60 marks. 
 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to 
study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be 
used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates must 
choose two appropriate poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to 
choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. 
Overall, performance improved compared with that of January 2012. This was the second sitting of 
examinations using the new cycle of texts. It was apparent that candidates were prepared for the
examination using the appropriate texts and so performance showed considerable improvement. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function 
effectively in the passage 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
3 
Compared to last year, candidates‘ performance on Paper 01 showed improvement in all genres. Overall, 
the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 12.35; in Profile 2, Poetry, 9.29; and Profile 3, Prose 
Fiction, 7.74. The weakest performance was in Prose. 
 
Question 1 
This question had the highest mean. The overall mean was 12.35 out of 20. Overall, 3 (0.33 per cent) of 
the 916 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. No candidate scored zero. The extract 
elicited involvement from the candidates and such resonation was demonstrated in their responses to the 
items. 
Part (a) asked candidates for a description of what was happening in lines 1–8, essentially seeking a 
response which covered the persons, place and main event (the stick-fighting competition). This was well 
done. Part (b), however, was not as well done. Although, candidates were aided by the explanatory notes, 
some could not find two pieces of evidence to support the claim that Inez was a ―mature coquette‖. 
Acceptable responses included all the evidence which supported how well versed Inez was in 
manipulating men to get what she wants. For instance, she speaks charmingly to Joe to ―ease up‖ on 
Swifty (―Give him a chance, Joe‖); she gets Swifty to obey her to ―clean up the place.‖ In fact, her 
attempt to charm Joe is so effective that instead of getting him annoyed, he praises her for ―[taking] over 
the business already.‖ 
Part (c) did not present a challenge for most candidates, but some failed to mention that Swifty‘s leaving 
the bar unattended contributed significantly to Joe‘s ire. In response to Part (d), regarding Inez‘s two 
roles, many candidates mentioned her role as mother/nurturer based on Swifty‘s response to her. 
However, other responses included her being peacemaker/mediator and a ‗boss‘ of sorts. 
By far, Part (e) was the most challenging as candidates could not explain the dramatic function of 
Briscoe‘s question. Acceptable responses included to change the subject; to diffuse the tension; and to 
divert Joe‟s attention from further conflict with Swifty. 
For Part (f), most candidates identified the simile as the figurative device, but as usual floundered in 
commenting on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses captured the comparison of the swiftness of the 
stick-fighter, who moved so quickly that this opponent was not aware of the coming blow until he felt it. 
Part (g) allowed candidates to demonstrate their creativity in suggesting the title and justifying it. A few 
however, presented titles without textual evidence, and thus lost marks. Candidates need to remember that 
reader-response items are always text based. 
Question 2 
Overall, 4 (0.44 per cent) of the 916 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. Two 
candidates (0.22 per cent) scored zero. The overall mean for this question was 9.29. 
Part (a) asked candidates to identify the main event (concert/contest/talent show) and its location (school). 
Most candidates were able to score full marks on this question. Although Part (b) was handled reasonably 
well, some candidates identified the incorrect stanza. Candidates were asked to select a line or phrase 
from the first stanza which describes Brother Kinsley‘s outstanding quality and comment on its 
effectiveness. Phrases included: ―swiftest legs”; “like sharpened blades”; “cutting through the finishing 
tape lines”. All these emphasized his prowess, his superior quality; in essence, how quickly, gracefully 
and efficiently he could run races. 
4 
Part (c) required candidates to describe the speaker‘s attitude to Brother Kingsley and to support their 
response with evidence from lines 9 to12. Many candidates merely mentioned admiration for his dancing 
and many failed to manipulate textual evidence to earn maximum marks. Acceptable responses included 
the way in which his graceful, effortless movements connected earth and air. 
Some candidates hinted at but did not give full treatment to responses in Part (d), which asked for an 
example of contrast and a comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses included: Brother 
Kingsley‟s dancing versus the girl‟s singing (effective because of the stark difference between Kingsley‟s 
talents and popularity against the girl‟s grating, despised rendition which emphasized the unfairness of 
the judge); the entire school versus Miss Stirling‟s judgment OR the symbol of the school versus 
repression OR the booing by all versus Miss Stirling‟s single voice. Any variation of these is effective 
because the contrast underscores the unfair and undemocratic nature of the judging. 
For Part (e), candidates were required to comment on one of the three quotations given. Some candidates 
disregarded the rubric and responded to all three, instead of commenting on one of the three given. Any of 
the following responses would have earned full marks: 
 ―he affected a clutching movement‖ is used to suggest that Brother Kingley‘s action was not 
willful but merely imitative; 
 ―dull unburnished memory gem‖ is used to suggest that the girl‘s performance lacked spectacle, it 
was ordinary; 
 ―a drooping slipper-satin/christian-quattie dress‖ suggests ill-fitting, ordinary, cheap and boringly 
correct attire. 
For Part (f) (i), candidates were required to identify the line where the persona‘s tone changed. Most 
candidates were able to understand the change in tone though some failed to identify the correct line. Part 
(f) (ii) required candidates to explain how the tone changes. Many candidates who attempted the second 
part of the question gave why the tone changed, rather than how the tone changed. The latter was required 
in order to earn full marks. Acceptable responses for the change in tone, Part (a), were line 16, “till he
affected a clutching movement”, and line 18, “Miss Stirling judged that move”. For Part (b), an 
acceptable response is: the tone changed from celebration/admiration to disappointment/a sense of 
grievance. 
Part (g) required candidates to comment on the appropriateness of the title. Some candidates did not 
appear to interpret this question well and presented instead, their own title for the poem. Candidates were 
expected to use textual evidence and respond to the key word concert as in celebration of talent but in this 
instance sarcastically entitled because of the outcome OR a communal condemnation, as in the students 
acting as one to expose Miss Stirling‘s judgement. Essentially, candidates were expected to respond to the 
effectiveness of the word, in light of the poem. 
Question 3 
Overall, the prose question generated the lowest mean (7.74). Candidates did not, for the most part, 
demonstrate a convincing understanding of the passage, especially in areas which required higher order 
comprehension skills. Candidates must attempt all the parts of the question so as to score the highest 
marks possible. In this section, in particular, some candidates did not do all the parts. No candidate scored 
full marks in this section and three (0.33 per cent) of the 916 candidates scored zero. 
Part (a) which asked for a description of the setting was done well. Most candidates were able to earn two 
of the three marks for this question. Acceptable responses included a description of the street/lane, rum 
bar, sea and twilight. 
5 
Part (b) required candidates to use evidence from paragraphs 2 and 3 to describe the relationship between 
Leila and Millie. While candidates were able to mention the girls were friends, many did not refer to the 
evidence from paragraphs 2 and 3 in their responses. Evidence from these paragraphs point to, the girls 
support/trust each other; Millie is the more aggressive/Leila is the more timid. 
For Part (c), candidates were required to comment on one of the quotations given. Some attempted the 
two, instead of one. Again, there was the tendency to explain or paraphrase. Acceptable responses for ―in 
the distance the sun slipped…‖ included those that paid attention to lonely and cold as these words 
seemed to define the relationship; the reinforcement of the relationship/situation through pathetic fallacy; 
the suddenness of night. For ―the smoky noises…‖, acceptable responses included the almost muted 
sounds from inside, merged with the smoke, seeped outside; the heightened contrast of inside/outside; the 
animal-like atmosphere of the inside is contrasted with the colder/cleaner environment occupied by the 
females. 
For Part (d) (i), candidates were required to identify one instance when either Millie or Bradeth was 
sarcastic. Part (d) (ii) required candidates to explain how the example shows sarcasm. Although 
candidates were able to identify the sarcasm in Part (d) (i), the explanation for Part (d) (ii) fell short. 
Some candidates ignored the instructions and supplied responses for both Bradeth and Millie, instead of 
Bradeth or Millie. An acceptable response for Bradeth included: ―check out what a bit of peace and quiet 
feel like, but it‘s not looking like we going to finish the test”. This is a sideswipe/veiled statement that the 
women were a nuisance, preventing the men from enjoying their rest. Another sarcastic remark was 
Bradeth‘s ―a long time now” and by repeating it, he is in fact ‗throwing words‘ at Millie, suggesting 
slyly, that she is the cause of his headache. 
Acceptable responses for Millie included: “You both have a nice sleep, then?” in tone which is 
suggesting, the very opposite. Her use of ―nice‖ is mocking; she hopes they had rotten sleep, and further, 
she disapproves of their sleeping in the first place. Her other remark, ―well now that the testing done” is 
sarcastic in that her pseudo-polite phrasing (―maybe you don‘t mind”) is really a kind of cover for the 
violence of ―testing your backside up to Sandy Bay”. 
Part (e), which asked candidates to suggest two impressions of the men and use evidence to support these
impressions, was fairly well done. However, like many of the questions candidates scored better in one 
part of the question. Candidates scored in mentioning that the men were friends/drinking buddies but 
many did not use the evidence which would allow them to score full marks. Acceptable responses 
included details which supported the fact that they seem to prefer their own company to that of the ladies 
(their controlling/nagging girlfriends); they were unreliable, having stood up the ladies. 
Part (f) was not well done. Candidates were required to suggest one reason why Aunt Toosie may want to 
talk to Bradeth and to justify their response. Candidates missed the inference and could not find 
supporting evidence. Some thought that Bradeth had done a literal test or felt that Aunt Toosie had not 
seen him for a very long time. Acceptable responses included: Aunt Toosie wanted to ask Bradeth about 
his intentions towards her niece; Bradeth may have a different view about the relationship and may be 
hesitant to commit to it; or Bradeth may not be as focused on the relationship as Millie. Marks were also 
awarded if candidates mentioned that Aunt Toosie wanted to talk to him about the drinking. 
Candidates did not appear to be very confident in responding to Part (g). This part of the question 
required candidates to list the sequential points of tension and explain how each point causes the tension 
to rise. Some candidates merely mentioned a point or two with no mention of how each contributed to the 
other. Acceptable responses included: the girls walking purposefully to an unfamiliar street; seeing their 
men lying drunken from a distance; tension building as Leila feels uncomfortable for having encouraged 
Millie to waste time waiting for the men; Millie‟s forceful action of pushing Bradeth away from her; her 
6 
posture, aggression and sarcasm which heighten the tension, plus Bradeth‟s pointed rejoinders, his 
stance (“hind legs first”), like an animal at bay climaxes the tension. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01 
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of style. It 
is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at 
meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the ‗performance‘ element of the genre. 
 Teachers could assist students to dramatize sections of plays in class — dramatize scenes and 
summarize scenes to encourage recall. 
 Teachers are encouraged to assist students in understanding the rubric of examinations and ensure 
that they do only what is asked. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to 
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgements, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgements in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Of the 12 questions in Paper 02, 6 (50 per cent) had candidates earning full marks. Less than 20 per cent 
of the candidates attempted Questions 4, 8, 10 and 12. Question 4, one of the questions on drama 
achieved the highest mean (19.17); the second highest mean was also from the drama questions: Question 
2 with a mean of 18.18. The lowest mean came from Prose Fiction, Question 7, with a mean of 12.03. 
Question 9 on The Wine of Astonishment was the most popular question, with more than 50 per cent of 
candidates attempting it. 
7 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
For Question 1, candidates were required to use evidence from Act 2 Scene1 to support the description 
that (a) Puck was a ―shrewd and knavish sprite‖; (b) describe how his actions cause confusion in the 
magic wood and (c) discuss Puck‘s dramatic function in the play. For Part (a), some candidates had 
difficulty recalling the scene. Acceptable responses included details which captured Puck‟s delight in 
doing mischief to humans and animals (frightening village maidens; skimming off the cream from the 
milk; tricking stallions/colts into thinking there is a filly nearby to name a few). Although some 
candidates listed/mentioned some of Puck‘s actions in the magic wood, responses to Part (b) lacked 
development. Acceptable responses included: he mistakenly enchants Lysander instead of Demetrius and 
Lysander awakes madly in love with Helena and scornful of Hermia; Oberon orders him to make matters 
right and he enchants Demetrius and this causes both men to declare their love for Helena, much to 
Hermia‟s consternation and anger. That same night Puck puts the ass‟ head on Bottom, causing the 
mechanicals to panic and scamper away. 
Part (c) which required a discussion of Puck‘s dramatic function was not handled well. Acceptable 
responses included: the comic humour by his words and actions; his intentional creation of comedy 
(under Oberon‟s orders) of Titania falling in love with an ass; he links the three worlds of the play; he 
closes the play by reminding the audience that they did but slumber and so reinforces the idea that the 
play is an illusion; thus returns the audience to reality. 
The mean for this question is 17.86 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Question 2 
Four couples were listed for candidates to choose one and for Part (a), to describe the personality 
differences between the male and female; Part (b) to describe one situation in which these differences 
were demonstrated and finally, Part (c) to discuss the way in which Shakespeare dramatizes these 
differences. Candidates managed Part (a) reasonably well, in that they were able to grasp that the men 
appeared to be domineering, authoritative, selfish and abusive; whereas the women tended to be 
passionate, accepting, headstrong, gentle and capable of love. Part (b), however, proved somewhat 
challenging in that candidates sometimes were not able to relate the characteristics of the characters with 
the situations. 
Acceptable responses for Part (c) included Shakespeare‘s use of conflict situations as a means of 
dramatizing the differences or contrasts. The use of enchantment (physical and psychological 
transformations as male partners struggle to retain or obtain power over females) and props (for example,
Bottom‘s ass‘ head as part of Oberon‘s attempt to dominate Titania). 
The mean for this question was 18.18 out of a total of 35 marks. 
The following are some recommendations that will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean 
texts and drama as a whole: 
 Teachers/instructors should find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even 
minor ones).
 Candidates should dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Teachers/instructors should identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations and 
discussion of scenes/excerpts. 
8 
 Candidates should practise Part (c) of drama questions, which target the language and 
application of drama. 
 Teachers/instructors should use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic 
techniques work. 
 Teachers/instructors should prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic 
techniques. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
For Part (a), candidates were asked to describe what was happening in Act 1 Scene 1; for Part (b) to 
discuss Miss Aggy‘s understanding of ambition and advancement and finally, for Part (c) to show how 
Rhone explores the ideas of ambition and advancement in the play. Although candidates were asked to 
give the details of the first scene in the play, many had challenges recalling the major incident (Len‘s 
beating because he was caught playing with Pearl by the river, and not at home studying) and a few 
candidates did not correctly identify Miss Aggy‘s relationship to Len. Acceptable responses for Part (b) 
covered Miss Aggy‘s self-hate and her dream of the light-skinned Margaret as the ultimate prize for her 
son (the epitome of advancement and ambition). 
Part (c), which focused on the writer‘s craft proved challenging for many candidates. Acceptable 
responses for Part (c) included the ways in which Rhone allows his audience to see a more balanced view 
of ambition and advancement than what Miss Aggy offers by using Pa Ben as storyteller and character to 
comment on and draw attention to Miss Aggy‟s actions; Pa Ben‟s role as mentor and confidante in 
fostering the relationship between Len and Lois (“the pretty black girl”); using Len and Lois as another 
alternative to Miss Aggy‟s bias, showing that ambition and advancement can come through the black 
middle class; using dramatic irony, contrast and flashback to interrogate Miss Aggy‟s anti-black stance. 
Costuming, props and visual imagery are also used to explore the idea of ambition and advancement. 
The mean for this question was 17.97 out of a total of 35. 
Question 4 
This question registered the highest mean for Paper 02 (19.17). Using the stem, Rhone‟s presentation of 
his characters is what makes this story worth telling, this question asked candidates for Part (a), to
describe two characters they find appealing; for Part (b), to show how one of these characters has his/her 
story to tell and Part (c), to discuss how the character named in Part (b) contributes to suspense in the 
play. Candidates managed Parts (a) and (b) reasonably well, perhaps because these parts were ‗open‘ 
enough for personal interaction. The suspense aspect of the question posed a challenge. Acceptable 
responses included a discussion on how the character selected impacted the drama/story through tension, 
resolution of the conflict, enhancement of the theme(s), and advancement of the plot. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
Part (a) required candidates to describe what was taking place in A Stone‟s Throw and The Woman Speaks 
to the Man Who Has Employed Her son in terms of how women are treated. Candidates had reasonable 
knowledge of the poems (although a few mentioned, wrongly, that the woman was raped by the mob in 
the first poem). Part (b) required candidates to discuss the speaker‘s attitude to the woman in each poem. 
In articulating the speaker‘s attitude acceptable responses for A Stone‟s Throw included the self-righteous, 
9 
smug, haughty and narrow-mindedness of the speakers (men) in their behaviour to exact judgment. The 
speaker in The Woman Speaks to the Man Who Has Employed Her Son is voiced through the concerns of 
a mother in the third-person narrative, who appears to be at the mercy of the don. She, however, has other 
and inner powers to draw on for strength and support as she faces the daunting task of her son‘s imminent 
violent end. 
Part (c) continues to be challenging to candidates. Candidates were asked to identify and comment on 
one poetic device used to explore the treatment of women. Acceptable responses included the use of 
biblical allusions, metaphor, irony, sarcasm, contrast, among others. Many candidates did not lose sight 
of the significance of the biblical allusions in the poems. In A Stone‟s Throw references to ―guru”, ―God￾merchant‖, and the title (―he that is without sin, cast the first stone‖) invoke ideas of supernatural 
intervention on the woman‘s behalf, as the rescuer stands alone against a blood-thirsty mob; hypocrisy 
exposed as no one could stone the woman and generally, the fate of women and their unequal status in 
terms of sexual indiscretion. In The Woman Speaks to the Man Who Has Employed Her Son references to 
Judas Iscariot‘s mother, the father giving gifts (Jesus‘ parable), and the thief on the cross all allude to 
relationships in families, betrayal and death, sin and consequences. 
The treatment of women is seen also through the use of contrast: the mob versus the guru; the scared 
woman versus the blood-thirsty men; the woman versus the man who employed her son. These all 
demonstrate the imbalance of power. 
The mean for this question was 15.28 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name that focus on a significant experience or 
event. Part (a) asked candidates to describe the experience or event; Part (b), to discuss the speaker‘s 
attitude to this experience or event and Part (c), to discuss one device that is used to present this 
experience or event. 
All poems on the syllabus could have been used. Part (c) was as usual, the most challenging as most 
candidates were not able to discuss the effectiveness of the poetic device to present this experience or 
event (even when correctly identified). The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in some 
instances only one device was identified. If this is to be acceptable, candidates must show its effectiveness 
(textually) in both poems. In order to gain full marks, candidates must correctly identify each device, 
show how it is used to portray the event or experience and make a statement of comparison between the 
two poems. 
Here is an example from a candidate who did a fairly good job of showing the effectiveness of a device 
by tying it to the experience/event (in this instance discrimination/racism in the poem ―Dreaming Black 
Boy‖): 
The constant repetition of „I wish‟ illustrates the longing and desire the persona has for 
oppression and blatant discrimination to stop. It is a symbol of grief as he feels helpless to the 
fact that he is oppressed by the white society. The phrase „I wish‟ is far-fetched and may not 
happen. Therefore, it is evident he thinks discrimination against African-Americans would not 
stop. By extension the phrase „I wish‟ reminds us of the famous speech made by civil rights 
activist Martin Luther King Jr which entailed the phrase „I have a dream.‟
The mean for this question was 17.69 out of a total of 35 marks. 
10
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
This was not a popular choice among candidates as less than 4 per cent of the 916 candidates attempted 
this question. The stem read: Songs of Silence is held together by the sure and simple voice of a child but 
interspersed with the voices of adult reflection. Candidates were asked for Part (a), to describe two 
incidents that Marlene the child observes OR experiences in the chapter Effita; for Part (b), to discuss how 
that chapter highlights that the story is being told from a child‘s point of view and finally, for Part (c), to 
discuss how Forbes mixes childhood and adult voices in the novel. Many candidates could not recall the 
details of the chapter and many confused Auntie Sare and Effita. Acceptable responses for Part (a) 
included how Auntie Sare was sustained by the community; Marlene‟s Sunday ritual of taking food to her 
and enduring her long and personal prayers; Effie, the community wailer and the incident in which she 
made the wrong pronouncement. 
Acceptable responses to Part (b) included the fact that the narrator declared that she was nine years old; 
her childish fascination with Auntie Sare‟s prayers; declaring that Auntie Sare was “older than forever”; 
the childish wonder in which Effie‟s actions are captured; repeating phrases from her mother and her 
constant questioning of the inadequacy of her mother‟s responses and generally, her living in „fear‟ of 
her mother. 
Implicit in this part of the question is the writer‘s technique. A few candidates hinted at but did not 
discuss with conviction the elements of Part (c). Acceptable responses to this part included: using 
Marlene as the child narrator or as the adult reflecting through the consciousness of a child; using 
various tones in Marlene‟s voice, for example, language registers (from the Standard to the non￾Standard); using voices of other adult villagers to comment on social issues; using folklore and 
juxtaposing the young naïve Marlene with the adult who looks back. 
The mean for this question was 12.03 out of a total of 35. 
Question 8 
This question was the least popular. Less than 1 per cent of the 916 candidates attempted it. The stimulus 
read: In spite of her insightfulness, Marlene, even as an adult, was still confused by some relationships. 
Candidates were required for Part (a), to describe two instances of Marlene‘s insightfulness in the chapter 
―So Few and Such Morning Songs‘; for Part (b) to describe two instances of Marlene‘s confusion in the 
chapter ―A Story with No Name‖; and for Part (c), to discuss one device that Forbes uses to portray 
insight and confusion in the novel. 
Candidates did not demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the text in order to describe two instances of 
Marlene‘s insightfulness in the chapter ―So Few and Such Morning Songs‖ or her confusion in ―A Story 
With No Name‖. Candidates also did not demonstrate sufficient facility with narrative techniques to 
respond to the final part of the question which asked for one device used to portray insight and confusion 
in the novel. Acceptable responses included: the narrative structure itself which tends to reflect Marlene‟s 
random wanderings; the narrator‟s „head‟ becomes the site of wandering as well („my head don‟t work 
straight…sometimes my head weave stories‟); stories do not support chronological development; 
symbolism, as in silence and the ways in which silence confuses or clarifies issues. 
The mean for this question was 12.33 out of a total of 35. 
11
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
This question was the most popular, garnering more than 50 per cent of candidates‘ responses. The 
stimulus read: ―I want you people to be against me”, Bolo says and his voice, Bee tell me, was a terrible 
cry. ―I want you to be my enemy. I want you to come and take these girls from me”. For Part (a), 
candidates were required to describe the situation in which Bolo poses this challenge; for Part (b), to 
discuss why Bolo would challenge the villagers in this way and for Part (c), to show how Lovelace 
presents the tension between the community and Bolo in the novel. 
Clearly the Bolo/Bee dynamics resonated with candidates and many were familiar with the text. For Part 
(a), candidates were fairly conversant with the issue of Bolo‘s abduction of Primus‘ daughters, Bee‘s role 
in trying to resolve the issue and Bolo‘s defiance of the entire village. Part (b), which asked for the reason 
for Bolo‘s challenging of the villagers was not lost on candidates who discussed Bolo‘s passion in waging 
his one-man war against the men in the village to regain their manhood. Part (c) which dealt with the 
writer‘s presentation of the tension between the community and Bolo was also managed well. Acceptable 
responses included: Bolo‟s challenging of Bee‟s decision to obey the law and stop shouting; Bolo‟s return 
from prison and turning into a bully and the reasons for this; the abduction of Primus‟ daughters; 
through elements such as contrast, figurative devices and symbols. 
The mean for this question was 15.33 out of a total of 35. 
Question 10 
The stimulus for this question read: Eulalie is a marginal, forgotten character in The Wine of 
Astonishment. For Part (a) candidates were required to describe Eulalie; for Part(b), to explain her role in 
the novel and for Part (c), to discuss Lovelace‘s treatment of women in the novel.
Superior responses demonstrated knowledge of Eulalie‘s symbolic role in relation to the Bonasse 
community, whereas weak responses demonstrated limited knowledge of this ‗marginal‘ character. A 
brief description of her yields her being the village belle and future wife of Bolo, only to be taken and 
used by the returning Ivan Morton. Although some candidates had challenges with the word role in Part 
(b), some rightly saw her as the personification of beauty and innocence in the village; she was Ivan‘s 
first ‗victim‘ from the village; her ‗violation‘ must have affected Bolo, whose pride would not allow him 
now to have her. 
Part (c) which asked for the writer‘s treatment of women in the novel, had responses which primarily 
featured Eva, the narrator and matriarch. Other responses included the fact that women are generally 
marginalized; they are victims of the male world. 
The mean for this question was 15.52 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Short stories 
Candidates are asked to prepare ten short stories for this section. Of the 916 candidates attempting the 
Prose Fiction profile 37 per cent attempted the question on short stories. No candidate attained full marks 
for these questions. As with the Poetry, this section contains Type B (comparative) questions. Generally, 
candidates were not conversant with some of the stories. In some instances, only one of the stories was 
studied sufficiently with the other, a mere passing acquaintance. Consequently, candidates lost marks as 
they launched into story telling or repeating of information to ‗pad‘ their responses. 
12
A World of Prose 
Question 11 
―Septimus‖ and ―Emma‖ were used to demonstrate how children and adults see the world with the 
suggested bias that readers preferred the children‘s perspective of the world. Part (a) required candidates 
to provide an outline of the views held by the children; Part (b) required an explanation of the adults‘ 
views on the matter and Part (c) required candidates to say which view is preferred with (textual) 
justification. 
The children in ―Septimus” collectively endorse the view of their parents that everything in the family 
must be shared: the children play together; ‗own‘ the street together and as Septimus would later learn, 
share the goodies together. In ―Emma” the children want to be spontaneous, unpretentious and not full of 
adult restrictions when they grow up. The adults, however, (as in the adult Septimus‘ delight in having an 
entire apple for himself and in ―Emma‖ with the adult play of deceit, betrayal and hypocrisy) tend to have 
opposite views to that of the children. 
Candidates for Part (c) exercised their reader-response skills although some did not base their responses 
too much on textual evidence. There was the tendency here to support the issues with their own narratives 
and this tended to divert their attention from the onus to keep to the ‗facts‘ of the stories. Justification 
requires textual responsibility. 
The mean for this question was 15.06 out of a total of 35 marks. 
 
Question 12 
Referring to the stories ―Shabine‖ and ―Blackout” in the context of ambiguity in malefemale 
relationships, candidates were asked in Part (a), to describe one malefemale relationship presented in 
each story and for Part (b), to show how the ambiguity is presented in each of these relationships and 
finally for Part (c), to discuss one theme that each writer portrays through these relationships. 
Able candidates described the narrator‘s secret fascination with Justine in spite of his grandmother‘s 
warnings (since he is her social superior). The brief bus-stop encounter of the black man and the white 
woman and the stereotypical assumptions form the basis of the relationship in ―Blackout.‖ 
Part (b) proved challenging to some candidates as they had problems understanding the word ambiguity. 
Acceptable responses for ―Shabine” included: the privileged male admirer sees Justine as a seductress 
and appears to be blind to the communal rejection of her; they both desire each other but lack the will to 
take the leap from admiration to action. The norms of North American culture (segregation and racist 
responses) evident in the subtle actions of the woman and the nationalistic pride juxtaposed with strong 
sense of equality affirmed by the West Indian black man in “Blackout” reflect the tension and ambiguities 
the story explores. 
Candidates were able to choose from a range of themes (racial intolerance, gender issues, class, inhibited 
love, black/white relationships) and some were able to apply them to the stories under discussion. 
The mean for this question was 14.14 out of a total of 35 marks. 
13
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, 
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 11–12 (Prose Fiction, Short Stories). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the discrete nature 
of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for students to sharpen their essay￾writing skills.
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of texts, 
for example, websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Attention must be paid to all parts of the question. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and 
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
Candidates need to be reminded that June 2012 was the beginning of the new cycle of texts to be studied 
and examined (with this 2013 being the first January sitting). Knowledge of the revised syllabus is 
necessary. 
For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative questions are those set on the Short Stories
(Questions 11 and 12). All other prose questions are on single texts. Candidates need to select the 
appropriate texts from the revised syllabus in order to be adequately prepared for the examinations. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2013 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one on each 
mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles 
which form the basis for candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of sub-parts that 
require candidates to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for 
each question, for a total of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from each section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this 
section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one 
of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the 
second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which they have 
studied from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and 
the two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the 
poetry section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires 
candidates to choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how 
effectively these elements function in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
-3- 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 
2011–2013: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for the Period 2011–2013 
Paper 01 2011
(%)
2012
(%)
2013
(%)
DRAMA 68.13 60.30 54.25 
POETRY 55.46 53.70 57.95 
PROSE 53.93 50.60 59.40 
Unlike the past years, candidates’ performance Drama declined while there was improvement this 
year in the other two genres. 
Question 1: Drama
Overall, 199 (0.98%) of the 20,318 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) asked candidates to refer to lines 1–4 of the dramatic extract and identify Nora’s state of 
mind, supporting their response with one stage direction and one other piece of evidence. Although 
candidates were able to identify Nora’s state of mind (she was sad/upset), many confused stage 
directions with textual evidence. Some identified two stage directions. Acceptable textual evidence 
included: “Oh really! Trying to frighten me!” and “But—No, that’s impossible!” (line 3). 
 
Candidates were asked to explain the dramatic function of the children in Part (b). Acceptable 
responses went beyond describing the children to explaining how their presence impacted Nora and 
even the audience. Thus, the children’s presence reinforces Nora’s maternal qualities (she is kind and 
gentle with them); their presence also reinforces her inner turmoil and the audience senses conflict 
when she admonishes them not to mention the ‘strange man’ who was at the house. 
Part (c) did not pose a challenge to candidates as many were able to comment on the Christmas tree as 
prop. Quite correctly, they mentioned that the tree hinted at setting (time of year, that is, Christmas 
time) and that it acted as a kind of diversion from the tension/conflict. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to use lines 23–26 to state their impression of Nora, with 
supporting evidence. Two marks were awarded for the impression and one mark for the supporting 
evidence. Two general impressions anticipated were that Nora is a multi-faceted woman/her life is 
busy and she will do whatever it takes to preserve her marriage. Candidates demonstrated a general 
knowledge of Nora’s character but lacked the vocabulary required to respond adequately to the 
question posed. They were able to describe the tasks Nora did but fell short in terms of using those 
ideas to form an impression or a conclusion. 
Candidates experienced difficulty stating one contradiction shown in Nora’s character, which was 
required for Part (e), although they managed to find evidential support in some instances. Embedded 
in the contradiction is Nora’s two-sidedness – the devoted wife and mother and the mother who 
encourages her children to lie; the good home-maker who cannot settle on any task or get a chance to 
do so and the loving wife who lies to her husband. 
-4- 
For Part (f), candidates were asked to explain the dramatic function of Helmer’s entrance. Many 
candidates realized the significance of the entrance but far too many could not use the literary 
language to bolster their response. Acceptable responses included: breaking/heightening the tension; 
adding to the suspense; breaking Nora’s train of thought.
Candidates displayed creativity and imagination in their responses to Part (g), which required them to 
imagine being Nora and use evidence from the extract to suggest how they wanted the audience to 
respond to them. 
Four thousand three hundred and fifty-three that is approximately 19 per cent of the 20,318 candidates 
who attempted Question 1 earned marks between 15 and 20. The mean for this question was 10.85 out 
of 20. This was the lowest mean achieved of the three genres tested. 
Question 2 
One hundred and eighty-three (0.90 %) of the 20,343 candidates who attempted this question scored 
full marks. 
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying the phrase (‘almost forgotten my dream’/ ‘my 
dream’) that captured the main idea in lines 1–6. 
Part (b) required candidates to identify the device in line 5 (simile) and comment on its effectiveness. 
The speaker compares the dream to the sun, a symbol of hope, life and possibilities. Most were able to 
identify the device and some gave reasonable responses regarding the effectiveness. 
Part (c) required candidates to discuss the effect of the repeated word (‘rose’) in lines 7, 8 and 11. 
Acceptable responses mentioned the development of the notion of progression and or entrapment. 
Thus, the magnification of the wall (representing obstacles) and the way in which the word ‘rose’
ends line 7 and begins line 8, present the encirclement or entrapment of the speaker. 
Part (d) (i) required candidates to identify the speaker’s tone in lines 1–12 
(reflective/nostalgic/conversational) and lines 20–29 (militant/determined/strident) and (d) (ii) 
required them to comment on the appropriateness of the change. Candidates were able to note the 
difference in tone at the beginning of the poem and towards the end. However, the discussion fell 
short in terms of why this change was appropriate. Acceptable responses captured the hope embodied 
in the dream at the outset, then the wall and finally the need to encourage himself to overcome the 
challenges in order to liberate himself. 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to state what was suggested by the use of “shadow,” “wall,” and 
“night” in (i) and for (ii), show how “dream,” “sun,” and “light” were opposed to (i). This was 
challenging to many candidates who interpreted the words in (i) in the very literal sense of a 
nightmare that the speaker was experiencing while he was asleep. Consequently, the words “dream,” 
“sun,” and “light” were erroneously interpreted as morning which brings sunlight, or the persona 
awakening from an unpleasant dream. Full marks were awarded to candidates who mentioned that the 
second set of words suggests hope and that the first set of words suggests entrapment and a strong 
sense of being unable to overcome obstacles. 
Most candidates managed to respond appropriately to Part (f), which asked for an explanation of line 
24: “Help me to shatter this darkness”. The speaker recognizes that he is in a state of defeat and 
pleads for assistance (perhaps from a higher power) to destroy this oppressive darkness or wall. 
Most candidates did exceptionally well on part (g), both in providing another title for the poem and 
using text-based evidence to justify their choice. Some responses included the idea that the title 
heightened the persona’s struggle to recapture what was lost; that it focused on the persona’s past and
that it encouraged reflection or introspection. 
-5- 
Five thousand, four hundred and sixteen (approximately 21%) of the 20,343 candidates who 
attempted this question earned marks between 15 and 20. The mean for this question was 11.59 out of 
20. 
Question 3 
The mean score (11.88) on Prose Fiction was the highest of the three genres. Four thousand six 
hundred and twenty-one (approximately 19%) of the 20,319 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 15 and 20. Eighteen (0.09%) candidates earned the full marks out of 20. 
Most candidates had a fair sense of what the passage was about and were able to answer Part (a) 
which asked for an outline of the passage. Acceptable responses took into account the fact that the old 
man had caught no fish; the concern of the boy and the old man’s disposition/strength. 
Part (b) required from candidates an identification of the mood in the first paragraph 
(despair/hopelessness/sadness) and to provide supporting evidence from the passage. Candidates had 
little difficulty with evidence from the passage. Some lost marks as evidential support given was not 
confined to the first paragraph. 
Characterization appeared to be understood by candidates. Part (c), which asked for two aspects of the 
boy’s character, with supporting evidence, was well handled. Any two of these character traits were 
acceptable: caring, compassionate, dutiful, and obedient. Candidates cited evidence such as the boy’s 
helpfulness in carrying the old man’s fishing and sailing gear; his being sorry for the old man; and 
that he reluctantly obeyed his parents’ command to leave the old man. 
Although candidates correctly identified the device in Part (d) as simile, they had challenges in 
commenting on its effectiveness. Some struggled with an explanation and commented that because a 
desert is a dry place, the simile is ineffective since it is no place for fishes to live. However, the 
effectiveness lies in its literary not literal meaning: a desert conjures up images of absence (of food 
and water); the landscape of a desert tends to be bleak and ravaged and this image is connected to the 
old man—nature’s harsh, enduring, unproductive (fishless) landscape. 
For Part (e), two marks were awarded for the effect created by the detailed description of the old man 
in paragraph 2, and one mark awarded for justification. Acceptable responses included how he was 
initially presented as thin and gaunt but as the paragraph developed he is seen as physically strong.
 
Part (f) asked candidates to explain why they might find the impression created by the final paragraph 
unexpected. Acceptable responses indicated the difference between what the reader expected based on 
the information given in the first paragraph as against what was presented in the final paragraph. 
Structurally, the final paragraph is the shortest. It ends with the refusal to be defeated; it testifies to the 
old man’s inner strength (evident in his eyes), unlike the other paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Teachers are encouraged to continue working with students to hone their skills in appreciating and 
responding to literature. In the examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a 
careful reading of the evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the 
strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events 
described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some students 
use in their responses to the questions.
-6- 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations 
and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, 
bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the 
critical and creative thinking that the study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, 
poems and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of 
consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday
living
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various 
sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques 
in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviou). This skill is 
tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular 
text
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature. 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Questions 1 and 2, which are set on the Shakespeare text A Midsummer Night’s Dream, attracted 
almost one-half of the total responses for the drama section. Question 1 was more popular than 
Question 2, and was attempted by more than half of the candidates. 
 
This question sought to elicit from candidates, a discussion on male dominance in the play. Part (a) 
asked for an outline of two situations in which such issues occur; Part (b) required a discussion of 
how women deal with the identified situations and Part (c), a discussion of one dramatic technique 
that Shakespeare uses to present the issue of male dominance. Candidates demonstrated familiarity 
with the theme of male dominance and were able to use male/female relationships relating to 
daughters and lovers to discuss Part (a) and use examples of Hermia, Titania and Helena for the 
discussion in Part (b). A few candidates referred to the mechanicals (the all-male cast) and lost marks 
here. Part (c) however, proved the most challenging in terms of identification of the technique and 
discussion of its function. Weak candidates repeated and narrated the theme of male female 
relationships in the play. In some instances, dramatic irony was named but arguing its relevance was 
not convincing. Accepted responses include plot development, characterization (comparison and 
contrast), use of suspense and dramatic tension. 
-7- 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and 142 (2.13%) of the 6,554 
candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 35. Two (0.03%) of these 
candidates earned full marks (35). The mean for this question was 17.31. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to outline the situation that caused Helena’s accusation of 
Hermia in Act III Scene 2, from which the quotation came; Part (b) asked for a description of the 
aspects of the personalities of Helena and Hermia that were brought out in this exchange and Part (c), 
a discussion of Shakespeare’s presentation of friendship in the play. 
Generally, candidates failed to recall this particular incident accurately. Some were able, to some 
degree, to identify the incident in the forest triggered by Puck’s inadvertent enchantment of Lysander 
and the consequences, required in Part (a). Candidates were also able to note the similarities and 
differences in these women. Predictably, Part (c) which sought to discuss the presentation of
friendship, (which really is a discussion of the how) was the most challenging. Candidates tended to 
recount what happened in the play without drawing meaningful conclusions about friendship (what is 
suggested). Typical responses to this part of the question were literal. Few candidates were able to 
discuss the different ideas about friendship that were suggested and or identify how techniques such 
as contrast, irony, and characterization were used to highlight issues about friendship. 
Seventy-eight (2.28 %) of the 1,822 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Eight (0.44%) of these candidates earned full marks. The mean for the question was 16.24. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the most popular question in the drama section. Part (a) asked for a description of 
what was happening (in reference to the quotation from Act I, Scene 1); Part (b), a discussion of Miss 
Aggy’s idea of the perfect wife for Len and finally, Part (c), a discussion of how the playwright’s 
dramatic presentation of black/white relationships is a powerful aspect of this play. 
Though both incidents have to do with women of whom Miss Aggy disapproved, many candidates 
referred to the river incident with Pearl and Len (instead of the photograph incident) for Part (a). 
Acceptable responses described Miss Aggy receiving a letter from Len which included a picture of his 
wife Lois, her rage and rejection of Lois and Pa Ben’s advice. Most candidates handled Part (b), 
which asked for Miss Aggy’s idea of a perfect wife for Len, quite well. Part (c) required a broader 
treatment than a description of black and (near)-white characters. Discussion should relate to the play 
as a whole, in terms of Rhone’s presentation of black/white relationships. Acceptable responses for 
this part of the question included major characters and what they represent; interrogations of 
whiteness as good and black as bad or evil; the ways in which the play can be making social 
commentaries in terms of value systems, dramatic irony (inversions of roles). 
Four hundred and sixty-seven (4%) of the 11,980 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30 and 35. Eight (0.07%) candidates earned full marks of 35 on this question. The 
mean for this question was 18.92, which was the second highest mean for a question in this section. 
-8- 
Question 4 
This was the least popular question on this paper, as only 250 candidates attempted it. 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to outline the situation that caused Pa Ben to make 
the comment quoted in Act II, Scene 3. Many could not remember the incident (Len’s visit to Pa 
Ben’s house in a bid to save Lois from his mother’s harm). Part (b) asked for a discussion of two of 
the three listed cultural practices (story telling, church going and belief in the supernatural). Even 
though prompts were provided in the wording of the question, many could not see these folk forms as 
dramatic technique. Part (c) asked candidates to comment on two themes brought out by these 
presentations. Acceptable responses included, (but were not limited to) history, or the past, religion, 
culture, identity, race, and class. 
 
Two of the 96 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 35. No candidate 
earned full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 13.82. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were, “It is the Constant Image of Your Face” and “Dreaming Black 
Boy”. Slightly more than half of the candidates attempted this question. Part (a) required candidates 
to outline the hopes and desires portrayed in each poem; Part (b) asked for a discussion of the poem 
found to be more appealing; and for Part (c) the task was to discuss one device from each poem which 
portrayed hopes or desires. 
Part (a) assessed candidates’ knowledge of the poems by asking them to recall, assess and summarise 
the information. Although candidates were more knowledgeable about “Dreaming Black Boy”, most 
responded well to this part of the question. The personal, yet text-based responses, provided for Part
(b) were refreshing and informative. Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft),
posed a challenge for many candidates. In many instances devices were mentioned but the discussion 
was vague and lacked textual support. Many did not link the device with hopes or desires. Acceptable 
responses included appropriate identification of devices and such devices and establishment of the 
connection between such devices and the hopes or desires. 
Words that were commonly misspelt included repetition, racism and prejudice 
Fourteen hundred and forty-four (approximately 14%) of the 10,304 candidates who attempted this 
question earned marks between 30 and 35. Fifty-four (0.52%) of these candidates earned the full 
mark of 35. The mean for this question was 20.13. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose from the prescribed list two 
poems that focused on the theme of conflict to answer the question set. Any relevant poems could be 
used but popular choices were, “Forgive My Guilt”, “Once Upon a Time”, “The Woman Speaks to 
the Man who Has Employed her Son.”, “This is the Dark Time, My Love”, “Dulce et Decorum Est” 
and “Epitaph” . Part (a) required candidates to describe this conflict (whether external or internal); 
Part (b) asked candidates to comment on how the conflict is treated or addressed in each poem and 
finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem which is used to explore this conflict. 
Part (a) was handled well for the most part. In this part of the question, candidates were expected to 
name the poems selected but sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. For Part (b), some 
candidates had difficulty with the word “comment” as they thought it meant solving the conflict. 
-9- 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of conflict. Some candidates 
mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify the devices and 
treated the discussion as a continuation of Part (b). 
Four hundred and forty-five (approximately 5%) of the 9,617 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 30 and 35. Twenty-one candidates scored full marks on this question. The 
mean for this question was 16.80. 
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A 
questions. These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the comparative 
treatment of two novels. Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular although for this sitting: the 
number of candidates attempting the questions set on this text increased marginally. 
Many of the candidates who attempted questions on this text demonstrated interesting insights. Part 
(a) of Question 7 asked for an outline of two of these three chapters: “The Idiot,” “Miss Minnie” and 
“Morris Hole”. Part (b) asked for a discussion of how the writer presents the confusion in the 
adolescent’s world in the chapters selected in (a); and for Part (c), a justification of the chapter which 
is more appealing. 
 
Many candidates went beyond the level of “outline” in Part (a) while others went to the extreme of 
storytelling. A few candidates misread the rubric and commented on all three chapters. Candidates’ 
ability to organize and summarise significant events in the chapters was the main skill tested. 
Candidates found Part (b) challenging in that they did not deal with the writer’s presentation of 
confusion as some neither identified nor discussed a technique. Acceptable responses included the use 
of proverbs and the story of Marlene’s mother and Pa Brown to frame her relationship with Ezekiel; 
relying on village gossip to explain strange incidents; the episodic, staccato-like collage of images
and/experiences mirroring the confusion in Marlene’s mind; the use of imagery, dreams and the river.
 
Part (c) was primarily reader-response, (with the requisite textual justification). Candidates managed 
reasonably well as they demonstrated familiarity with the text. 
One hundred and nine (9.9%) of the 1,041 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30 and 35. Six candidates scored full marks on the question. The mean for the question was 
21.57. 
Question 8 
By referring to two characters in the novel, Question 8 asked for a discussion of the statement, 
“Forbes presents silence as a refuge in the novel Songs of Silence.” Many candidates identified 
suitable characters who portray silence, for example, Paul’s mother in ‘A Story with No Name’, 
Marlene the narrator, and other characters such as Miss Minnie, Effita, Nathan and Little Fool Fool. 
Candidates were also conversant with the concept of silence as refuge. For candidates to have gained 
maximum marks there needed to have been stronger identification and discussion of 
devices/techniques to present the many nuanced silences in the text. Acceptable responses included 
symbolism; interplay between what is said and what is not; and contrast and comparison. 
Forty-eight (5.15%) of the 912 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 
35. One candidate scored full marks. The mean for this question was 19.38. 
-10- 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
Twice the number of candidates attempted this question, compared with the number attempting
Question 10. Part (a) asked candidates to trace the rise of Ivan Morton; Part (b), a comparison 
between the leadership style of Ivan and Bee and Part (c) required an analysis of the ways in which 
the tension between Ivan and Bee dramatise the clash between the old ways and the new. 
For Part (a), many candidates gave details about Ivan without showing how he developed. By missing 
the concept of trace, candidates ignored the chronological element embedded in the task (many did 
not even mention Ivan the boy). Because the text is not chronologically sequenced, this might be part 
of the challenge faced by candidates. For Part (b), candidates were knowledgeable about the 
leadership styles but the details supplied sometimes were not germane to the question. In some 
instances, candidates did not draw inferences from details given. For example, when Ivan moved into 
the Richardson’s house, what did his actions suggest? How might that inform his leadership? Part (c) 
was handled commendably. Candidates saw the tension represented by these men in terms of the old 
ways (tradition, roots, the folk) and any threat to that way of life. Many were sensitive to the tension 
portrayed in the comparison, the writer’s use of suspense and many candidates mentioned the near 
explosive scene when Ivan told Bee that his people could “act white” as a means to survive. 
One hundred and seventy-four (2.59%) of the 6,582 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30 and 35. Three candidates scored full marks of 35. The mean for this question was 
16.62. 
Question 10 
Referring to Bee telling Eva, “I going to break this law,” candidates were asked to discuss the ways in 
which the Wine of Astonishment explores the idea of resistance and rebellion. Although weaker 
candidates resorted to storytelling, the idea of resistance resonated well with candidates as there was 
little difficulty identifying incidents and characters involved. Some candidates listed points (as with 
pros and cons) a practice that is not encouraged. In some instances, candidates lacked the vocabulary 
to express themselves and knowledge and usage of certain words (as in passive, active, non-violent, 
non-insurrectionary, retaliate), which could have helped. Additionally, candidates lacked awareness 
of basic historical fundamentals about the plot, such as (the American presence in Trinidad at that 
time). Popular responses included the collective resistance of the church led by Bee and the 
Bolo/Prince confrontation. 
Forty-eight (1.44%) of the 3,186 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Two candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question
was 15.33. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
The Short Story section patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, 
the short stories to be used are specified in one question, while for the other question; candidates 
choose two appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were, “Blackout” and “To Da-duh, in Memoriam.” It 
asked candidates to make the connection between setting and plot. Candidates were asked to describe 
the setting of each story in Part (a). Part (b) offered options for the candidate to show how the writer 
used descriptive language or dialogue or contrast to develop the story. Part (c) asked for an 
explanation of the significance of setting in the development of each story. 
-11- 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward. Some candidates disregarded the rubric for Part 
(b) and discussed more than one technique. Acceptable responses for this part included the use of 
descriptive language to evoke mood; description of landscape; dialogue to reinforce attitudes and; 
perceptions; and contrast (from the perspective of character, setting, intentions). 
Part (c) posed a challenge in that candidates displayed limited knowledge of the significance of setting 
to the development of the story. Acceptable responses included the ways in which the setting (as in 
“Blackout”) provides the background and reasons and attitudes of the positions taken by the two 
characters (the sense of superiority of the woman as against the nationalistic pride of the man). The 
two settings in “To Da-duh, in Memoriam” become the representation of the two main characters 
(rural Barbados and cosmopolitan New York) and the conflict between native tropical elements and
the modernizing effect of the metropolis. 
Here is an example of a good response to Part (c):
The white woman is in mental darkness and fails to see the ‘light’ that the man is showing her that all 
men are created equal. In the end, it is not he who needs to take a ‘light’ from her (cigarette or 
otherwise) it is she who must take a ‘light’ (knowledge and acceptance) from him. Also, in ‘To Da￾Duh in Memoriam’, the story starts off with the narrator not being able to see, as the airport is dark 
and somewhat crowded, obscuring her view. She eventually sees Da-Duh, as she is standing in the 
light in her white dress and trying to find her way to them. Similarly, the [narrator] was in ‘darkness’ 
thinking that her world of technology was all there was, and was better, only to come to Barbados 
and see the flaws in her lifestyle and the emptiness of it…setting is significant in both stories and the 
‘darkness’ can be taken both literally and symbolically as it represents the need for some kind of 
‘light’ in order to see clearly. 
Twenty-four (0.67%) of the 3,410 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. One candidate earned the full mark of 35. The mean for this question was 14.49. 
Question 12 
In this question candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list and in Part (a), 
to describe the love relationship portrayed in the two stories: Part (b) asked for a discussion of how 
the attitudes displayed by two characters affect the outcome of the relationship and Part (c), an 
identification of and commentary on one device used by the writer to convey his/her view of the 
relationship. Some candidates lost marks because they included inappropriate texts (such as poems, 
drama texts and novels). Apart from naming and discussing devices, candidates generally 
demonstrated a degree of weakness in writing the comparative essay. 
Eighty-four (1.68%) of the 4,973 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Two candidates earned full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 15.79. 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
On the whole, many essays were well structured, coherent and cohesive. Teachers should be 
commended for their hard work. However, more attention needs to be given to the acquisition of 
knowledge of literary terms and dramatic techniques, the ability to discuss their use by the playwright 
and to comment on their effectiveness. We urge teachers/instructors to continue to emphasize and 
recognize genre-specific terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness. 
-12- 
1. Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of preparation for the 
examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short stories) limits the depth of the 
discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to 
answer the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as 
this is a genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken 
the analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs
and finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker 
students to develop the required skills.
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‘dramatic function’ and ‘writer’s 
craft’. Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected 
words or plotted events for particular effects.
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be 
constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not 
the film version, for instance). 
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, describe, 
determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by dedicating time to closely 
examining the nature of the response expected by each of these and other key words used in 
questions. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, 
teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the 
language to describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and 
gained through listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an 
instrument of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to 
explore, question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, 
the kind of applicability, is what sometimes emerged in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
 EXAMINATION 
JANUARY 2014 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) examination in English B consists of 
two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, 
one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are 
the content profiles which form the basis for candidates’ assessment. In each question, 
candidates are required to give approximately five to eight short answers. Twenty marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 60 marks. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on 
specific texts. Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. 
Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the 
questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the 
second question, Question 6, candidates must choose two appropriate poems from which they 
have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question from 
this section. 
Section C, Prose Fiction, consists of six questions. The two novels (Questions 7–10) are Type A 
questions. The short story consists of Type B questions. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. 
Of the 12 questions on this paper, five had candidates earning full marks. Prose (Question 11) 
achieved the highest mean (22.41); the second highest mean was from Drama (Question 2 with a 
mean of 19.69). The lowest mean came from Prose (Question 8) with a mean of 7.92 out of a 
total of 35 marks for each question. 
3 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills: 
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a 
given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props. 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive. 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters. 
Compared with 2013, candidates’ performance on Paper 01 showed improvement in the Poetry 
and Prose Fiction profiles. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 9.69; in 
Profile 2, Poetry, 10.73; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 8.03. The weakest performance was in 
Prose Fiction. 
 
Question 1 (Drama) 
This question had the lowest mean. For Part (a), many candidates misinterpreted aspects and 
gave responses which merely stated the familial relationship between the two men 
(uncle/nephew). Acceptable responses should (keeping to lines 1–10) focus on the character 
traits of the men, for example, Petu was authoritative and authoritarian whereas Ato, the nephew 
being submissive, deferred readily to Petu’s commands. Part (b) asked for two functions served 
by the stage directions starting from line 10 and ending at line 20. Some candidates restated the 
stage directions whereas others responded appropriately to include the following: they serve to 
inform the audience that time has elapsed; that Ato wastes no time in obeying Petu; that time has 
elapsed since Ato’s appearance and disappearance; and that Eulalie’s smoking and drinking 
reflect her attitude to the community’s traditions. 
Again the word aspects in Part (c) appeared to be problematic to candidates. Instead of focusing 
on the nature of the relationship between the couple, candidates provided ‘surface’ responses that 
essentially restated factual information from the extract, such as, Ato and Eulalie were married. 
4 
Some candidates did not provide sufficient justification for the aspects of the relationship 
identified, whereas some identified aspects with no justification. Acceptable responses should 
take into account the fact that the couple is still very much in love with each other (they still can 
share a joke and they have private names for each other). Also, Ato is protective of her (advising 
her not to drink too much). 
In response to Part (d), although candidates understood what the question demanded, some 
responses were not as comprehensive and comments were mainly made about Eulalie’s drinking 
and smoking. Responses should also include her disgust and resistance to the traditions of her 
husband’s family.
Candidates were comfortable with Part (e) which dealt with tension and gave acceptable 
responses such as the tension intensifies towards the end because the playwright increased the 
tempo of the action by the shortened lines of dialogue, increased use of stage directions and the 
use of questions. 
Part (f) allowed candidates to demonstrate their creativity in suggesting the title and justifying it. 
A few however, presented titles without textual evidence, and thus lost marks. Others ‘lifted’ 
words from the extract such as “taboo”, “Ato” and “Eulalie” without critical application. 
Candidates need to remember that reader-response items are always text-based. 
Question 2 (Poetry) 
Most candidates earned full marks for Part (a) which asked for three things about the bayou (a 
place of mystery, habitat for frogs and grasshoppers, mossy). 
Apart from mentioning the mystery, many candidates could not show how stanza 1 was 
connected to stanza 2. Acceptable responses for Part (b) should include the following: stanza 1 
introduces the idea of the allure of buried or sunken pirate treasure, while stanza 2 seems to take 
the reader on a treasure-hunting expedition where travellers seem to enter a world “dripping in 
mystery”; stanza 2 further develops the mystery introduced in stanza 1 by suggesting that beyond 
buried treasure, there might be even some live, dangerous creatures lurking beneath the surface. 
Although candidates were able to identify the device in stanza 2 that Part (c) required them to 
provide, many failed at explaining the effectiveness. Acceptable responses of the device 
included, personification/metaphor (“the bayou sweats”); metaphor/imagery (“dripping in 
mystery”); and imagery appealing to sight (“murky”) and sound (“hushed in secrecy”). All 
devices point to the idea of a heightening of the tension/excitement surrounding the bayou’s 
hidden and perhaps dangerous secrets. 
5 
For Part (d), candidates gave vague responses and the word impressions appeared to have been a 
challenge. Acceptable responses should indicate that the impression is created that mortal 
danger lurks in the bayou and this can come from any of the creatures/monsters which can grip, 
clench, snap and hold. 
Most candidates gave reasonable responses to Part (e) and mentioned the use of phrases like, 
holds a mystery, movements unknown, dripping in mystery to suggest the notion that the person 
is viewing the bayou from a distance. For Part (f), candidates tended to view stanza 4 in isolation 
and therefore missed how it is connected to the poem as a whole. Acceptable responses should 
mention how it reinforces the idea of mystery and danger to those who venture in it; “guardian 
trees” which suggest that the vegetation serves to protect its secrets from intruders; the image of 
the empty canoe drifting suggests that the human occupant(s) has/have been destroyed by the 
bayou or the creatures there — a general reinforcement of danger throughout the poem. 
Some candidates did not exercise creativity in Part (g). However, others gave acceptable 
responses in describing and substantiating the mystery—there is a monster in the water; there is 
no danger but a feeling of dread created by the atmosphere and vegetation. 
Question 3 (Prose) 
Candidates performed satisfactorily on Part (a) which asked for two reasons for Amabelle’s visit 
to Kongo (to ask his approval for the elder to visit him to talk about Joel’s accident and to make 
an offer to pay for Joel’s funeral). However, many failed to be specific in their responses, 
providing vague or incorrect assumptions as their answers. For instance, many stated that 
Amabelle visited Kongo because she wanted to ask him something or she sought to tell him that 
the elder wanted to see him, suggesting then that Kongo was being summoned by the elder, 
rather than the elder wishing to visit him. 
For Part (b), candidates were also able to provide the two versions of Joel’s death as presented in 
the extract — accident and homicide. Many scored full marks on this item. For Part (c), some 
candidates were able to accurately identify Kongo’s feelings (grief/sorrow) and that his over￾emphasized actions disguised his emotions (for example, digging flour from his fingernails and 
taking snuff to steady himself). 
For Part (d), candidates were able, for the most part, to identify the simile and a few gave 
reasonable responses about its effectiveness. However, many candidates merely explained what 
weeds are/do. Those who responded appropriately, mentioned Joel being one with nature or his 
being independent/self-reliant, bringing out the notion that weeds need very little, if any, special 
treatment to flourish. Candidates found Part (e) quite challenging. Generally they could not 
explain what was ironical in the way Joel was buried. Many commented on the fact that he was 
6 
buried naked. Candidates could not make the link between the father giving Joel a ceremonial 
burial and a typical ceremonial burial. Ideally, candidates were expected to note that all the 
trappings of a ‘decent’ burial were removed yet his father’s description of the burial ritual made 
Joel into a kind of cosmic royalty. 
Some candidates knew what was required for Part (f) but lacked the literary language to express 
themselves. Essentially, Kongo’s measured, controlled, simple and affectionate choice of 
words/expressions seem extraordinary, heroic and regal. His tendency to repeat reinforces his 
sense of loss but also (especially when he repeats “my son”) shows grief, pride and affection. 
Part (g) asked to state what was suggested in line 26 (“Tell him I am a man….He was a man, too, 
my son.”). Many candidates only captured the fact that his refusal of financial aid for the burial 
of his son suggests he is independent and missed the opportunity to suggest that Kongo believes 
that he needs to be treated with respect regardless of his position. 
Recommendations 
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of 
style. It is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving 
at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the ‘performance’ element of the genre. They need to focus some more on the 
dramatic function of stage directions. 
 Teachers could help students to dramatize sections of plays in class, dramatize scenes and 
summarize them to encourage recall. 
 Teachers are encouraged to assist students in understanding the rubric of examinations so 
that they do only what is asked. 
7 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions 
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 23 of the 
syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and 
plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of 
consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday 
living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis 
(the ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from 
various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, 
analytical responses …and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various 
techniques in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). 
This skill is tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
For Question 1, candidates were asked to describe the challenges faced by one of these couples: 
Lysander and Hermia or Demetrius and Helena before their wedding. Part (b) asked for a 
description of how the challenges identified in Part (a) are resolved and Part (c), Shakespeare’s 
use of the couples’ experience to demonstrate that marriage is an important social institution. 
Although some candidates resorted to narration of the couples’ stories, many identified 
appropriate challenges, for instance, Egeus’ objections to Lysander and his insistence that 
8 
Hermia marry Demetrius; under the enchantment Lysander professes love to Helena and rejects 
Hermia; Egeus supporting the idea that Demetrius should be Helena’s husband or generally, 
society’s patriarchal laws and their impact on these couples. 
Part (b) was also reasonably attempted. Part (c) however, posed a challenge as many candidates 
were not able to make the link that Shakespeare’s dramatic presentation of marriage forms part 
of the climax. This part of the question asked candidates to show how Shakespeare uses the 
couples’ experience to demonstrate that marriage is an important social institution. This implicit 
use of technique (via the marriages) is a typical feature of comedies and candidates missed this. 
Generally, candidates tended to speak more about love than marriage, missing the point that the 
marriages offer resolution and consolidation, thus endorsing the notion that it is worthwhile and 
desirable. 
The mean for this question was 17.94. 
Question 2 
Candidates handled this question better than Question 1. Part (a) asked for a description of one 
of the incidents which occurs in the magic wood and Part (b), a discussion of the outcome of this 
incident. Part (c) asked for an examination of how this incident relates to the title of the play. 
Although few candidates narrated, most confined their discussion to the woods. For Part (a), 
acceptable responses included the consequences of Oberon’s malice and Puck’s enchantment. 
Part (b) was not handled well as some candidates could not separate the incident from the 
outcome and in cases where the outcome was mentioned, it was not discussed. Acceptable 
responses included the ways in which Puck ‘re-enchants’ the enchanted ones back to the right 
ways of seeing or the ways in which the illusion is removed so characters are back to normal. 
Relating the incident to the title (as was asked for in Part (c)) was handled fairly well. Even 
responses that were weak in Parts (a) and (b), scored well here as candidates were able to explore 
issues such as magic, dream, the fantastical and the suspension of reality. 
The mean for this question was 19.69. 
Recommendations 
A few recommendations that will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean texts (and 
drama as a whole) are given below. 
 Teachers should find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even the minor 
scenes). 
9 
 Students should be encouraged to dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Teachers should ask students to identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations. 
 More practice is needed with regard to the Part (c) of drama questions, which tend to 
target the language and application of drama. 
 Teachers should use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic techniques 
work. 
 Teachers should prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic 
techniques. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
The thematic concern of this question was family relationships. Part (a) asked for Lois’ role in 
the play; Part (b), a discussion of one instance of conflict involving Lois and Part (c), an 
examination of two ways in which Rhone resolves conflict in the play. Candidates tended to 
discuss the play rather than concentrate on Lois’ role. Inaccuracies such as Lois being male, her 
being confused with the character Miss Aggy (Mama) and misrepresenting other texts were 
noted. Acceptable responses for Part (a) dealt with Lois’ pivotal role as wife, daughter, 
daughter-in-law and professional and the ways in which she is connected to Len, Miss Aggy and 
George. In terms of conflict, as required in Part (b), candidates were expected to choose one 
instance in the play where this was evident. Candidates did better in this part as they were able to 
identify and discuss instances such as when Miss Aggy sees her photograph and the 
consequences; any other physical encounter (as in her mother-in-law’s visits); the blackmailing 
incident with George or even when she accuses Len of being cold and insensitive. 
For Part (c), many candidates described instead of examined the two ways in which the conflict 
was resolved. Some concentrated on one conflict instead of two. Acceptable responses included 
dramatic irony, contrast, symbolism (as in the ending of the play) and the use of Pa Ben as 
character/storyteller in his role as mediator. Others concentrated on the ways in which the 
characters solved their own conflict and not the ways in which the playwright did, which 
essentially evaded the playwright’s craft. 
The mean for this question was 16.78. 
 
10
Question 4 
This question earned the lowest mean for the drama section. Candidates were expected to 
describe one instance when the audience was reminded that the play has its roots in the past (Part 
(a)). Acceptable responses for this aspect included the rural setting for the storytelling; 
references to 60 years ago; the type of housing (wattle and daub); the king’s head on stamps and 
monetary currency. Part (b) asked for a discussion of one way in which flashbacks are used to 
reinforce the idea of past events. Candidates were expected to mention for instance, Lois as the 
bank teller and being blackmailed by her boss George; Len’s humiliation at school at the hands 
of George and his peers. Candidates fared better in Part (c) which asked for a discussion of one 
theme highlighted by the playwright’s treatment of the past. Submissions such as family 
relationships, cultural practice, gender, power relationships, colour and class were acceptable. 
The mean for this question was 15.67. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The two named poems for this question were “Dulce et Decorum Est” and “This is the Dark 
Time, My Love”. Part (a) required candidates to describe the suffering presented in each poem. 
They were better able to describe the suffering in “Dulce et Decorum Est”, perhaps because of its 
overtly physical nature. Candidates did not always capture the emotional/mental suffering in the 
latter poem. For Part (b), candidates correctly identified and named the device used to portray the 
suffering but many could not sustain the discussion (that is, keeping it to the theme of human 
suffering). Part (c), which asked candidates to use the title of each poem to discuss the poem they 
found more effective in portraying human suffering, posed some challenges as well. Although 
this part of the question allowed for personal choice and discretion, candidates were expected to 
apply the content and craft to their personal responses. 
The mean for this question was 13.39. 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name, which focus on relationships. 
Although some candidates did not use poems in this cycle and others used inappropriate texts (as 
in non-poetry), many selected appropriate poems for this question. However, details to support 
the theme of relationships were not always sustained, for example, in “Orchids”. A popular and 
well-handled poem was “God’s Grandeur” which portrays mankind’s relationship with the 
environment. A few lesser known poems were not handled confidently, for example, “South”, 
11
“Theme for English B” and “West Indies, USA”. Part (a) asked candidates to describe the 
relationship. Part (b) asked for a discussion of devices used to explore the relationship in each 
poem. The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in some instances, only one device 
was identified. If this is to be acceptable, the candidates must show its effectiveness (textually) in 
both poems. In order to gain full marks, candidates must correctly identify each device, show 
how it is used to portray the relationship and make a statement of comparison between the two 
poems. 
For Part (c), candidates were asked to discuss the relationship they found more appealing. Many 
did not refer to the other poem or suggest how they came to prefer the poem being discussed. 
Those who handled this section well concentrated on relationships involving man/nature; 
teacher/student; parent/child. For this section, application and poem selection posed challenges. 
Discussions were unbalanced because candidates did not always know both poems well enough 
for the application needed. 
Prose Fiction 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The questions set on the two novels (Questions 7–10) are 
Type A questions. The questions set on the short story consist of Type B questions. Candidates 
were required to answer one question from this section. 
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
This was not a popular choice among candidates. Responses were sparse and superficial. There 
were instances of inaccuracies and personal invention. Very few candidates were sufficiently 
aware of the text and its nuances. For Part (a), candidates were asked to discuss the relationship 
between these characters — Longman and Marlene’s mother and the Lady with no name and 
Marlene’s father. For Part (b), candidates were required to explain what limits the narrator from 
telling the whole story of these relationships. For Part (c), candidates were asked to show how 
the way the story is told contributes to the fascination. The relationships involving Marlene’s 
parents are clouded with uncertainties and candidates for Part (a) were expected to describe what 
appeared to be unusual about these relationships, for instance, Marlene’s observation that when 
the traveller (Longman) stopped or stayed, her mother was exceptionally joyful and would break 
out into singing; the incident of Marlene seeing her father giving fish to the no name lady and his 
stern warning for her not to mention it and the ways in which she became suspicious and 
speculative. 
12
Acceptable responses to Part (b) included, the fact that the narrator’s mother outlines what 
issues belong to the world of adults and that of children; the role of village gossip, superstition 
and rumour; and generally, the limitations of a child narrator, using the first person point of 
view. 
Implicit in this part of the question is the writer’s technique. A few candidates hinted at but did 
not discuss with conviction the elements of Part (c), which really should concentrate on how the 
story is told. Acceptable responses to this part of the question included: using Marlene as the 
child narrator (in a sense, the eyes of a child); the loyal, trusting daughter speculating on the 
marital relationships of her parents; the ways in which the blanks are filled; the interaction of 
the adult or outside perspective on the issues and the role of irony and intrigue. 
The mean for this question was 10.54. 
Question 8 
This was an open-ended question in which candidates were to discuss the two ways of viewing 
the text — as a cohesive whole or as a collection of separate short stories. Acceptable responses 
for the whole text view would entail the fact that Marlene is the single narrator throughout; the 
setting is typically the same rural village; Marlene’s family members appear in the stories and 
that the symbols, and images of the river, silence and colours are seen in the text. For the view of 
the short story, the idea that the stories are self-sustaining; the themes changing; the main 
characters can ‘stand alone’; separate chapter titles and the varying perspectives (from the 
communal to the intensely personal) are all points that may be used. 
The mean for this question was 7.92, the lowest for this paper. 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
This question focused on the roles played by the minor characters Primus and Buntin. Part (a) 
asked for a description of an incident in which either Primus or Buntin plays a meaningful role; 
Part (b) asked candidates to comment on this character’s role in the novel and Part (c), for a 
discussion of the male villagers as a group in the novel. Although it appeared that the word 
meaningful posed a challenge, generally, Primus was the more popular choice for Part (a). Many 
cited the Bolo/Primus standoff and the few who chose Buntin, mentioned his shop being the 
meeting place for the community. Those who chose Buntin often did not recognize that for Part 
(b), he was also part of the awakening of the consciousness of the community and black people 
generally. Although candidates mentioned the activities at his shop, they did not take the 
13
discussion much further. For Part (c), candidates tended to describe what the men did but did not 
so much see how they functioned as a group in terms of their being protectors, guardians of the 
traditions (for example, stick fighting), restorers of order and providers. 
The mean for this question was 19.69. 
Question 10 
This open-ended question asked candidates to look at both sides of Bolo. It was the preferred 
choice although some candidates resorted to storytelling or discussed only one side of Bolo. 
Superior candidates showed both sides of the argument — Bolo the warrior and community￾builder and Bolo the ‘bad john’ who degenerates when the community lacked the courage to 
support his values. 
The mean for this question was 15.97. 
Short Stories 
A World of Prose 
Question 11 
“Berry” and “The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream” were used to discuss the issue of injustice. Part 
(a) asked for an outline of each story; Part (b), a description of the injustice in each story and Part 
(c), a discussion of the narrator the candidate thinks contributes more to his/her understanding of 
injustice. Candidates knew the stories and managed Part (a) quite well. The issue of injustice 
resonated with them and they had strong views about racism, parent/child relationships and 
matters of infidelity. These enabled them to form their own views. What a few lacked for Part (c) 
was showing how their own experiences are shaped by the characters’ experience of injustice. 
Additionally, some candidates did not mention the impact of writer’s craft, as in the omniscient 
narrator’s perspective as a means of getting into the hearts and minds of the characters. 
The mean for this question was 22.41, the highest overall. 
Question 12 
Candidates were asked to refer to two stories studied from their prescribed text and, for Part (a), 
to describe a memorable event or incident in the stories; for Part (b), to comment on one 
character’s reaction to the events or incidents in the stories and for Part ( c), to show how the 
writer keeps the reader interested in the stories. Common choices were “Emma”, “Blackout”, 
14
“Shabine” and “The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream”. Part (b) proved to be the most challenging as 
candidates tended to narrate before getting to the essential material required for the response. 
Some candidates recognized writer’s craft that was necessary to do justice to Part (c) and 
mentioned the child narrator and the use of flashback. 
The mean for this question was 16.71. 
Recommendations 
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, 
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 11–12 (Prose Fiction, Short Stories). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the 
discrete nature of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for students to sharpen their 
essay-writing skills. Modelling is essential. Attention must be paid to all parts of the 
question. 
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of 
texts, for example, websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and 
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
Candidates are reminded that January 2015 will be the end of this cycle and hence this cycle of 
texts. A new cycle of texts will be used for June 2015. 
For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative questions are those set on the Short 
Stories (Questions 11 and 12). All other prose questions are on single texts. Candidates need to 
select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus in order to be adequately prepared for the 
examinations. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2014 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright© 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one on each mode 
of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form 
the basis for candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of sub-parts that require candidates 
to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for each question, for a total 
of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which correspond to 
the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from each 
section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparative analysis of aspects of two poems. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are 
specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified in the 
question. However, for the other, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which 
they have studied on the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to choose 
the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills: 
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how effectively these 
elements function in the passage 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
-3- 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 2012–
2014: 
Mean Scores by Profile: Paper 01, 2012–2014 
(Expressed as Percentage of Profile Maximum Score) 
Paper 01 2012 2013 2014
DRAMA 53.64 52.45 56.08
POETRY 46.76 53.82 48.82
PROSE 48.06 50.51 48.43
Candidates’ performance declined in Poetry and Prose. 
Question 1: Drama 
Eighty-six (0.43%) of the 20,104 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) asked candidates to refer to lines 1–4 of the dramatic extract and state what they learnt about Tyrone 
and Mary. Acceptable responses included, Mary and Tyrone are playful/affectionate; Tyrone flatters Mary or
Mary falls for the flattery which seems to transform her. Candidates did well on this question. 
Candidates were asked to state Tyrone’s intention at the beginning of the extract (lines 1–6) for Part (b). 
Acceptable responses included, Tyrone’s intention is to cheer her up or Tyrone’s intention is to distract her 
from what seems to be bothering her. Apart from a few candidates who used similar responses for Parts (a) and 
(b), candidates responded fairly well on this question. 
Part (c) asked candidates what was suggested by Mary’s exclamation, “Right in front of Jamie!” Acceptable 
responses included any of the following: 
 It suggests that she is embarrassed by the affection shown to her in the presence of her son 
 It suggest that they are not normally this affectionate in front of their son; Mary is a coy woman 
 Mary is a shy woman who does not like displays of conjugal affection in front of others 
 Mary is very straight-laced about matters of (sexual) love. 
Most candidates, were able to earn at least some of the 3 marks allocated to this question. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to justify whether Mary was really “fishing for compliments” as in 
lines 8–9. One mark was awarded for the position taken and two marks, for the justification. The flexibility 
of the reader-response element allowed candidates to score in this part as they were allowed to agree or disagree. 
Examples of acceptable responses were as follows: No, Mary is not fishing for compliments. She appears to be 
a senior person and really may have trouble with her eyes; or yes, she is fishing for compliments as she can 
always depend on her husband and son to make her feel better (and stop her from worrying about Edmund). 
Candidates experienced difficulty with Part (e), which asked them to comment on the use of any one of the 
stage directions in presenting Mary’s state of mind from lines 29–42. Most were able to identify and explain 
the stage directions; however, many did not comment on the playwright’s use of the stage directions to 
present Mary’s state of mind. Some candidates also had difficulty with identifying both aspects of Mary’s 
state of mind. Many focused on the fact that she was worried/concerned, and did not recognize that there 
were changes in her state of mind. Acceptable responses captured the following: 
-4- 
The playwright effectively uses the stage directions to establish that Mary seems to be quite agitated or 
distracted. He does this by using the stage directions to show the sudden changes in her mood or mood 
swings (“She laughs…she changes to a brisk business air” and “she sighs with humorous 
exaggeration…she goes to the parlour, then turns, her face worried again”). It seems as though she tries 
to shake off what is disturbing her but it very quickly seems to overcome her. The stage directions show 
the contrasting actions which are an indication of her state of mind. 
For Part (f), candidates were asked to explain the effect that Edmund has on the performance on stage. 
Many candidates did not earn the full four marks on this part and gave superficial responses such as, 
“Edmund adds suspense to the audience.” Acceptable responses should include some of these ideas: 
 
Edmund is not on stage. Yet, all the actions and even emotions displayed on stage are centred on him. 
Mary seems to be distracted and worried because of his illness. Her inconsistent actions seem to be 
because of his illness. Her husband’s actions toward his wife are also directed by Edmund or his illness. 
She seems to have become a “ghost of the dead” and his actions on stage are geared towards bringing 
her back to her former self by helping her not to focus on Edmund’s condition. This is evident in his
exclamation. “You’re a fine lunkhead! Haven’t you any sense? The one thing to avoid is saying anything 
that would get her more upset over Edmund”.
For Part (g), candidates were asked to show how Jamie’s comment, “you can see she’s deliberately fooling 
herself with all that summer cold talk” might affect the audience. This was not handled well. Acceptable 
responses included: 
Jamie’s comment at the end of the extract answers many of the questions that the audience has had about 
the action on stage. The reason for Mary’s state of mind is confirmed. Her husband’s actions are also 
explained. The audience will therefore understand that his actions are quite justified given the situation 
where it seems that Edmund could die. The audience may also feel a great deal of compassion for Mary 
as well as for Tyrone as his wife’s physical appearance, health, and state of mind seem to have 
deteriorated and he seems to be unable to help her, though he tries. 
The mean for this question was 10.81 out of 20. This was the highest mean achieved for the three genres 
tested. 
Question 2 
Thirty-two (0.16 %) of the 20,102 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying where (on a train) and when (at night) the event is 
taking place. The second portion of Part (a) asked candidates to say in what way the speaker was different 
from those around him. Candidates had no difficulty in stating that the speaker was alert/awake while the 
others were sleeping. 
Part (b) required candidates to state the impressions created by the used of, “My muscles moved with steel” 
(line 14) and “We thunder through ravines” (line 18). The use of the word “impressions” seemed to have 
caused some amount of difficulty for candidates. Some candidates took a literal interpretation of the first 
quotation. An acceptable response for the first quotation was acknowledgement of the merger of the living 
with the non-living and/or the suggestion of power created. The latter also emphasized the power of the train, 
its speed and especially the loud sound it makes as it rushes through the valley. 
Part (c) required candidates to explain how the poet used contrast in lines 4–5 to hold the reader’s attention. 
Many candidates identified and explained the contrast, but some did not go on to fully explain how this 
contrast served to hold the reader’s attention. Acceptable responses should contain some of the following 
ideas: 
-5- 
The poet contrasts the train/nature; light (from the train)/darkness (of the night); being awake/asleep. 
The speaker shows us the trees, the mountains, the lake, mist and rain as he lies awake while everyone 
around him is asleep. Why is he awake? Why the details of nature? The poet creates these and other 
questions in our minds through the contrasts presented. These questions are only answered at the end of 
the poem, “I stay up half the night/To see the land I love”.
Part (d) required candidates to identify the literary device used in one of the following (1 mark) and 
comment on its effectiveness (2 marks): “Bridges of iron lace” (line 6) or “gullies washed with light” 
(line19). Acceptable responses for the former included a discussion which captured the following: 
Through visual imagery, this metaphor compares the design of the metallic structure to beautiful, 
delicate and patterned needlecraft–that of lace. This comparison extends the contrast between the sound 
of the train as it thunders in the night and the beauty and quiet of the trees, nature the land that he loves. 
For the latter, this metaphor/personification portrayed how the light of the train shines in the darkness, covering 
the gullies with its radiance.
For Part (e), candidates were asked to show how the poet captured the movement in this journey. 
Many candidates focused on movement as the train progressed so they gave information on the various 
sights that the persona experienced as the train moved along. Only a few commented on aspects of the poem 
which suggested movement, for example, diction, devices and rhythm. In other words, candidates seemed to 
relate more to content than to structure. Candidates were expected to mention for instance, the short lines, 
the rhyme scheme and strong stress, weak stress pattern which create a rhythm (beat) that suggests constant 
movement. In addition, candidates were expected to indicate that phrases and words such as “rhythm 
rocks”, “straining”, “thunder”, “rush”, “rattles”, “shake”, “jerk”, “shove”, produce alliterative and 
other sound effects that suggest the powerful engine heading to its destination. 
Part (f) asked candidates to describe the speaker’s attitude in the last two lines of the poem. 
Acceptable responses included: 
the attitude is one of patriotism/nationalism; the love for country is such that the speaker is willing 
to remain awake half the night, just to see his beloved country. Not even the lulling/rocking 
movement of the train could get him to sleep. 
Part (g) asked candidates to suggest another title for the poem (1 mark) and justify this with evidence from 
the poem (2 marks). This question was well done. Candidates used their creativity to find text-based 
suggestions for their titles. 
The mean for this question was 10.41 out of 20. 
Question 3 
Twenty-seven (0.13%) candidates of the 20 043 who attempted the question earned the full marks. The 
mean score (9.99) on Prose Fiction was the lowest of the three genres. 
For Part (a), most candidates had a fair sense of where the event was taking place, and were able to provide 
supporting evidence. Acceptable answers included, near Castle Rock or in a forested area or in the fringes. 
Part (b) (i), required candidates to state why Ralph was hiding, and (ii), asked for a description of his state of 
mind. Acceptable responses included, that he was hiding because he was in danger or he was being hunted by 
the others (“the hunters”). Acceptable responses for the second part of this question included that, Ralph was 
scared. He thought the hunters were pursuing him. He only felt safe when he realized that there was a feast and 
the hunters would be occupied with that. But this feeling of being safe was temporary as he realized that 
tomorrow would bring new dangers. 
-6- 
Many candidates seemed to have some difficulty responding to Part (c), which asked for an explanation of 
the writer’s use of contrast in the first paragraph. Some were not able to identify the contrast. Also, most of 
those who were able to identify the contrast could neither adequately explain it nor comment on how it was 
used by the writer. Many candidates omitted this question. Acceptable responses included: 
The writer contrasts the image of the hunters whom Ralph sees at present with the image of them as 
he had known them; the description of Bill, for instance, as a savage “striped brown, black, and 
red” does not fit the picture or image of Bill in shorts and shirts. Additionally, hunters are supposed 
to be strong and brave, and while the image of the hunters is terrifying in that it generates fear in 
Ralph, these hunters ironically, like Ralph, appear to be quite terrified (“and then had rushed back 
to the sunny rock as if terrified of the darkness under the trees”).
For Part (d), candidates were asked to identify the literary device used in, “The afternoon died away” (line 7) 
or “Ralph wormed out of the ferns” (line 8) and comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses 
included the following ideas: 
The former is personification/metaphor. The writer compares the passage of time from afternoon to 
night with death. This emphasizes the fear of the unknown and of danger that Ralph is perhaps 
associating with the night. It also suggests the slow passing of time for Ralph which he has to 
endure. The latter, is metaphor. It creates an image of Ralph’s crawling movement on the ground to 
avoid detection. The image of him moving as a worm (hinting perhaps at his vulnerability) also 
helps the reader to understand the possible danger that he may face. 
For Part (e), two marks were awarded for candidates’ giving the impressions created by “impenetrable 
thicket” (line 9) or, “He peered with elaborate caution” (lines 9-10). Again, the word “impressions” seemed 
to have been a challenge for candidates and many merely paraphrased or explained the selected phrase. 
Acceptable responses should note that 
“impenetrable thicket”— conveys the idea that Ralph is hemmed in by the thick vegetation that he 
cannot get through. This can only symbolize his feeling of being trapped by his hunters or his sense 
of being surrounded by ‘savages’ or the intensity of terror that he cannot think through or the great 
psychological distance between Ralph and his pursuers. The latter (“He peered with elaborate 
caution”) suggests that this expression also emphasizes the danger that Ralph faces. He has been 
hiding and is going to great lengths to protect himself. 
Part (f) asked candidates to explain how the writer maintained suspense in the passage. Some candidates 
seemed to have difficulty identifying suspense, while others mentioned one incident that caused suspense 
but failed to describe how suspense was maintained. Acceptable responses should mention that the writer 
suggests that the hunters are new to this role and seem to be as afraid as the hunted (“terrified of the 
darkness”). Suspense is also maintained because though Ralph is safe because of the feast he is aware that 
tomorrow could present a different situation. It is this sense of uncertainty which heightens the tension and 
keeps the reader in suspense. 
Finally, in Part (g), candidates were asked to identify the overall mood of the passage and to provide 
evidential support for their answer. In some instances, although they identified the correct mood (fear/
anxiety), candidates did not provide textual support. Acceptable responses should include words used such 
as “panic”, “terrified”, “savage” to create the mood; the idea of the hunt is established in the first 
paragraph; the setting (forest, night/darkness) enforces the mood. 
-7- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01 
Teachers are encouraged to continue working with students to hone their skills in appreciating and 
responding to literature. In the examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a careful 
reading of the evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will 
assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some students use in their responses 
to the questions. Moreover, students need to be familiar with appropriate literary language and use it in their 
writing and should understand genre-specific words, terms and concepts such as mood and suspense. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and 
emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by 
their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative 
thinking that the study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions 
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and 
other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a 
text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama 
Shakespeare: — A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Of the pair of questions on this text, the second was more popular than the first, Question 1 sought to elicit a 
discussion on the pairs of rulers, Oberon and Titania and Theseus and Hippolyta. Part (a) asked for a 
description of the circumstances of Oberon’s meeting with Titania in the magic wood. Part (b) required a 
discussion of what resulted from this meeting and Part (c), a comparison of Shakespeare’s presentation of 
Oberon and Titania with that of Theseus and Hippolyta. 
-8- 
Generally, candidates performed satisfactorily, especially in Parts (a) and (b). Part (c), however, posed a 
challenge in that candidates failed to compare Shakespeare’s presentation of one couple with his 
presentation of the other. Candidates fell short in discussing the playwright’s craft. They did not provide an 
adequate comparison of the two couples. For instance, Theseus and Hippolyta personify sobriety and mature
wisdom; they represent stability and a unique union of love and reason, unlike Oberon and Titania, whose 
marital discord upsets the balance in nature and affects the human kingdom. 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays. The mean for this question was 17.41. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to describe the nature of the complaint in Act 1 Scene 1, when 
Egeus approached the court of Theseus regarding Hermia; Part (b) asked for a discussion of the effect of this 
incident on the course of events and Part (c), a discussion of Shakespeare’s presentation of male dominance 
of women in the play. 
This was the most popular of the four drama questions. Candidates demonstrated superior knowledge of the 
text, especially in Parts (a) and (b). However, many candidates resorted to storytelling of the incidents 
identified as examples of male dominance in Part (c). It appears that candidates were not effectively 
prepared to answer questions dealing with dramatic presentations/dramatic techniques. 
The mean for the question was 21.74. 
Modern Drama: Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the second most popular question in the drama section. Part (a) asked for a description of a 
situation in which one character was portrayed as mostly good and one that was mostly evil; Part (b), a 
discussion of the character who made the drama more exciting as a result of this portrayal and finally, Part 
(c), a discussion of how the playwright used the final scene to reinforce the idea that good triumphs over 
evil. 
Generally, candidates were quite knowledgeable of the text although for Part (a) some selected scenes 
instead of ‘a situation’. Candidates referred to characters such as George, Len, Miss Aggy, Pa Ben and Lois. 
Part (b) was the most challenging as candidates generalized and related incidents from the play without 
elaborating. Also, opinions, when given did not have supporting details. Some candidates deviated from the 
characters discussed in Part (a) and so lost marks. For Part (c), some candidates did not focus enough or at 
all on the final scene, though they used aspects from other parts of the play. A few gave their personal 
religious views on this final scene, without the requisite textual reference. Those candidates who gave 
effective responses noted the ways in which this final scene brings together the major characters; the 
effectiveness of the flashback to answer pertinent questions, especially for Miss Aggy’s benefit; the 
symbolism of the circle and the confessions and reaffirmation of love and loyalty. 
The mean for this question was 19.65. 
Question 4 
This was the least popular question on this paper, as only 1 227 candidates attempted it. 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to describe one instance when the educational appeal of 
storytelling was highlighted. Some candidates found the concept of “educational appeal” problematic as they 
were unable to identify the ‘teachable’ moments in the play. Educational appeal was taken to mean
‘education’, as in Len’s academic achievements. Part (b) asked for a description of one instance when 
humour was used to entertain the audience. Candidates did well in this part as there was no shortage of 
examples of, for instance, Pa Ben’s witty interaction with his ‘on-stage’ audience; the biting exchange 
-9- 
between Lois and Miss Aggy, among others. Part (c) asked candidates to show how Rhone used the art of 
storytelling to appeal to his audience. Acceptable responses included, (but were not limited to) song and 
dance; proverbs and sayings; suspense; preparing for the storytelling event. 
The mean for this question was 16.14. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were, “Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge” and “South”. 
Approximately 25 per cent of the candidates attempted this question. Part (a) required candidates to describe 
the places being described in the poems; Part (b) asked for a comparison of the speakers’ attitudes to the 
places portrayed and for Part (c), the task was to discuss one device from each poem which was used to 
create an effective portrayal of the places. 
Some candidates confused “South” with “A Contemplation Upon Flowers” and “God’s Grandeur”. 
Part (a) assessed candidates’ knowledge of the poems by asking them to recall and summarize the 
information. Candidates were more knowledgeable about “Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge,”
and most responded well to this part of the question. Candidates found Part (b) challenging and many 
struggled with the vocabulary to capture, describe or define “speakers attitudes” (such as reflective, 
nostalgic, and appreciative). Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft), posed its usual 
challenges. In many instances, devices were mentioned but the discussion was vague and lacked textual 
support. There was some confusion regarding the simile (which many candidates continue to misspell) and 
metaphor. Many did not link the devices with the effective portrayal of the places being discussed. 
The mean for this question was 16.78. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose from the prescribed list two poems 
that focused on the theme of a memorable event or experience to answer the question set. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the event or experience in each poem; Part (b) asked candidates to compare the 
speakers’ attitudes to the event or experience and finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem 
which is used to present this event or experience. 
Part (a) was handled well for the most part. Popular poem choices were, “Dulce Et Decorum Est”, “Forgive 
My Guilt” and “Dreaming Black Boy.” In this part of the question, candidates were expected to name the 
poems selected but sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. Candidates demonstrated limited 
knowledge about the following poems: “Orchids”, “A Stone’s Throw”, “Theme for English B” and “It is the 
Constant Image of Your Face.” For Part (b), some candidates had difficulty in determining the speaker(s), 
therefore, they were in many instances, unable to address attitude. 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of the memorable event and 
experience. Some candidates mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not 
identify the devices. 
The mean for this question was 16.83. 
-10- 
Prose Fiction 
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A questions. 
These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the comparative treatment of two 
novels. 
Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular. However, some of the candidates who attempted questions on 
this text demonstrated interesting insights. Part (a) of Question 7 asked for a description of two occasions in 
which readers get a rich picture of rural life. Appropriate responses could include Effita’s warnings of death; 
the No-name Lady’s habits; school activities; children’s games; church services and village gossip. Part (b) 
asked for one technique used by Forbes to create this effect. Candidates were expected to make references 
to, for instance, the use of the child’s voice or perspective; re-creation of diction and register of characters; 
recounting colourful conversations; symbols, metaphors, humour and proverbs. Part (c), asked for 
candidates to comment on the lessons that readers might glean from these presentations. Some candidates 
had challenges with the word glean. 
The mean for the question was 18.11. 
Question 8 
Question 8 asked for a discussion of the statement, “The narrator’s references to school life allow us to 
understand the complex social influences and the varying outcomes of schooling in rural Jamaica.” 
The term “complex social influences” seemed to have interfered with candidates’ understanding of the 
question. Candidates did not treat this as an argumentative essay in which the onus was on them to provide 
textual evidence to support the position taken. Strong textual evidence could have been taken from chapters 
such as “The Idiot”, “Miss Minnie” and “Little Fool Fool, Fathers and Travelers.”
Two candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.00. 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
Part (a) asked candidates to describe one incident in which Eva played a major part as Bee’s wife; Part (b), a 
discussion of her role as character in the novel as a whole and Part (c) required candidates to say how she 
differed from the other women in the novel. Generally, candidates did well but found Part (c) challenging as 
they merely narrated Eva’s qualities, with little emphasis on the actual difference between Eva and the other 
women and providing textual reference to support the points made. Acceptable responses for this part of the 
question should focus on the fact that Eva is the most developed of the female characters; she may be
compared with other women such as Eulalie, Ivan Morton’s wife, the other women who are portrayed as 
victims and objects. 
The mean for this question was 16.63. 
Question 10 
Candidates were asked to discuss the following statement: “The major conflict in The Wine of Astonishment
is between tradition and change.” Responses to this question ranged from poor to superior. Mediocre 
responses confined themselves to narration of the plot without analysis of the text, with little knowledge of 
background to the context. There was the tendency to focus mainly on Ivan or Bolo. Superior candidates 
were able to successfully analyse the events as told by Eva and demonstrate the link between conflict, 
tradition and change as well as provide evidence to support their responses. While most candidates 
-11- 
understood the nature of both tradition and conflict there were those who concentrated heavily on either 
tradition or conflict. 
The mean for this question was 16.56. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
This section is similar to the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, the short stories 
to be used are specified in one question, while for the other question candidates choose two appropriate short 
stories from the prescribed list to answer the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were, “Septimus” and “The Man of the House.” Part (a) asked 
candidates to describe how the mother of each boy demonstrated her special care for him. Part (b) asked for 
an explanation of the ways in which each boy went astray and Part (c) asked candidates to comment on the 
message each story conveyed about the boys. 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward. For Part (b), acceptable responses included the 
principle of sharing that Septimus’ mother tried to instill in him and for the latter story, how the boy failed 
to live up to his responsibilities. In Part (c), candidates experienced some difficulty in comprehending the 
word “conveys”. The message in the first story is the power of strong family values in changing and 
sustaining one’s character. For the latter, the message is that it takes more than goodwill to assume the 
responsibilities of manhood. 
The mean for this question was 16.11. 
Question 12 
In this question, candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list that shared the same 
theme and in Part (a), to describe what happened in each story; Part (b) asked for an explanation of how each 
story illustrated the theme. Some candidates failed to precisely define/describe the theme and consequently, 
many contrived their own (such as in “black’ and “food”). Part (c), asked for a comparison of the authors’ 
treatment of the theme in the two stories. Candidates knew the stories selected, for the most part. However, 
some candidates lost marks because they included inappropriate texts (such as poems, drama texts 
and novels). Apart from naming and discussing devices, candidates generally demonstrated a degree of 
weakness in writing the comparative essay. 
The mean for this question was 18.20. 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
On the whole, many essays were well structured, coherent and cohesive. Teachers and students should be 
commended for this achievement. However, more attention needs to be given to the acquisition of 
knowledge of literary terms and dramatic techniques, the ability to discuss their use by the playwright and to 
comment on their effectiveness. We urge teachers to continue to emphasize and recognize genre-specific 
terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness. 
Teachers and students should note that the January 2015 sitting will be the last of this current cycle of 
texts. 
-12- 
The new cycle of the syllabus will begin in June 2015. 
1. Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of preparation for the 
examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short stories) limits the depth of the 
discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer 
the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this is a 
genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs and 
finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students to 
develop the required skills. 
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‘dramatic function’ and ‘writer’s craft’. 
students need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected words or plotted 
events for particular effects. 
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the film version, 
for instance). 
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, describe, 
determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by dedicating time to closely 
examining the nature of the response expected by each of these and other key words used in questions. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and reading the poems, for instance, teachers 
are encouraged to take them one step further. They should be empowered to master the language to 
describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through 
listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument 
of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to explore, 
question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, this kind of 
applicability, is what sometimes emerged in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2015
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2015 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
2
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 
consists of three compulsory questions, one on each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and 
Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of subparts that require 
candidates to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for
each question, for a total of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination.
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer 
one question from each section.
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. 
Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section.
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to 
engage in comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the 
syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the 
examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from those which they have studied from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A 
questions and the two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story 
section is similar to the poetry section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be 
used and the other requires candidates to choose the appropriate short stories from the 
prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one question from 
this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per 
cent to the examination.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension
 Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a 
given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain 
how effectively these elements function in the passage.
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props
3  Awareness of the relationship between action and motive
 Awareness of the interaction among characters
The table below shows mean scores for Paper 01 for 2015: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for 2015
Paper 01 2015 Mean (20)
Drama 10.39
Poetry 9.75
Prose 12.02
Performance on Prose Fiction was the best compared with that of Drama and Poetry. 
Question 1: Drama
Part (a) asked candidates to briefly describe what is happening in the extract. Acceptable 
responses included Harry learns that his mother has been called to the hospital and that his 
father may be discharged. Candidates did fairly well on this question.
For Part (b), candidates were asked to refer to the exchange between Sam and Hally and 
explain the effect created by the use of short sentences in lines 3–16. Acceptable responses 
included the building of tension and speeding up of the action. Responses were somewhat 
vague for this part of the question. 
Part (c) asked candidates to suggest one reason for Hally’s mood change in line 17. 
Acceptable responses included, he realizes that his father may be discharged or his father 
has gotten worse. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to explain the dramatic function of the telephone call 
in line 24. In order to earn full marks, candidates needed to include one of the following: the 
call serves to introduce a point of tension; provide information about Hally’s parents (Hally 
thinking his mother is weak and not strong enough to resist her husband’s demands); provide 
clarification of the message; provide information on Hally (shows that he may be insincere or 
selfish or shows the relationship with his father). Some candidates did not earn full marks 
because the explanation was lacking. 
Part (e) asked candidates to describe the relationship between Sam and Hally and provide 
supporting evidence. Candidates did well on this part of the question. Acceptable responses 
included the idea that although it is an employer/employee relationship, it is a warm and 
caring one. 
For Part (f) (i), candidates were asked to explain the irony in lines 29–32 and Part (f) (ii) 
asked for a revelation of Hally’s character from these lines. Candidates did not perform well 
on this part of the question. Many did not see the irony in the son’s response that the hospital 
was best for his father and interpreted this as genuine concern for his father’s wellbeing and 
not as an indication of his own selfishness. 
4
Candidates were asked to suggest how Hally might react if his father came home and to 
provide justification for this suggestion. Candidates made sensible suggestions ranging from 
the son’s resentfulness, his failing his examinations, or his avoidance of his father since he 
wants to study. This question assessed candidates’ ability to use the context to make 
judgement and draw reasonable conclusions. 
Question 2: Poetry
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying the word (“again”) in stanza 1 that 
showed that the trumpeter had been to that location before. 
Part (b) required candidates to explain two images of the trumpeter that were suggested in 
stanza 1 and to provide the evidence. In some instances, the images were provided without 
the evidence and vice versa. Acceptable responses included: image of a crazy person, with 
the evidence, “no wild paranoid gaze”; a beggar, with evidence, “no palm turned upward”; 
a sad/depressed person, with evidence, “no sad haze…”; and a proud/confident person, with 
evidence, “only a prideful stare”. 
Part (c) required candidates to state three effects of the power of music in stanza 2. Many 
candidates gave literal responses and others simply ‘lifted’ portions of the poem to supply a 
response. Acceptable responses should have contained some of these ideas: kingdoms 
fall/power relationships change; people are liberated; people are empowered; prisoners are 
set free and earthquakes occur. 
Part (d) required candidates to identify the literary device used in one of the following and 
comment on its effectiveness: “cities that crack and crumble” (line 15) or “these piercing 
notes / may be daggers too” (lines 22–23). Acceptable responses for the former included a 
discussion which captures the following: The hard ‘c’ sound contributes to the force and 
impact of the fall. The crack speaks to the initial reaction to the force, whereas the 
crumbling, to the final movement in the process. The implicit comparison of a concrete 
structure being ‘broken’ by trumpet blasts may also allude to the fallen walls of Jericho after 
the collective ‘shout’/musical blast. The device here may be any of the following: 
alliteration, metaphor, onomatopoeia. 
For the latter, any of these devices is appropriate: metaphor/irony/paradox/oxymoron/word 
play. Irony/paradox is seen in that the musician is profoundly changed by the very change in 
his listeners. There is paradox in the fact that music portrays how the beauty of the music 
causes pain. Word play and oxymoron are evident in that “piercing notes” and “daggers”
both suggest wounds. There is a certain amount of incongruity in comparing the musical 
notes (something associated with healing and peace) with daggers (something associated 
with hurt and violence). 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to select an example of either rhyme or repetition and 
comment on its effectiveness. The attempt here was fair in that candidates had a good sense 
of these devices. Their shortcoming was commenting on the effectiveness. Regarding rhyme, 
there are significant sound effects and some amount of half rhyme, as in lines 6 and 7 
(“stare” and “aware” and lines 23 and 25, (“too” and “blue”). These long sounds 
contribute to the mood and enhance the intensity of the trumpet blasts. Regarding repetition, 
the word ‘no’ is repeated three times in stanza 1 and the phrase “down it comes” twice in 
stanza 2. The repeated “no” adds to the militancy of the trumpeter and reinforces the 
absence of what he is usually perceived to be (crazy and destitute). Stanza 2 builds the 
5
momentum as the music gathers a life and strength of its own, tearing down structures with 
its power. 
Candidates were asked to identify in Part (f), three ways in which the final stanza is different 
from the others. This was fairly manageable for the candidates. Acceptable responses 
included any of these three ways: it is shorter; it concentrates on the trumpeter and how he is 
affected by his own music; it shows the trumpeter has his own pain; it is more reflective; the 
more subtle effects of the music are evident. 
Part (g) asked candidates to identify, with supporting evidence, the speaker’s attitude to the 
trumpeter. Although many could not find the appropriate literary language, many conceded, 
rightly, that the attitude is positive. Appropriate responses for the attitude included
admiration, respect and appreciation. Supporting evidence included “man-god”; “he / 
stands, and with trumpet levelled”; “a prideful stare”; “he alone knows”.
Question 3
For Part (a) (i), most candidates were correct in identifying the setting (forest/near a river) 
and were able to say why Will captured the iguana Part (a) (ii), which was to provide food. 
Part (b) required candidates to use supporting evidence and say why the mood in paragraph 1 
is different from that of paragraph 2. Acceptable responses should have captured the contrast, 
such as the mood in paragraph 1 is peaceful, calm, quiet and serene while the mood created 
in paragraph 2 is tense, fearful and threatening. The response must have included the 
appropriate supporting evidence in order to gain full marks.
Many candidates seemed to have a challenge responding to Part (c), which asked for an 
explanation of the effect of each of these images: “giant fig tree with thick, gnarled roots” and 
“water seemed to turn from a dark green to an almost black”. Responses tended to be rather 
literal and descriptive. For the former, acceptable responses should have included the idea of 
the impact of the knotted roots, the strength of nature and an overall frightening/eerie effect. 
For the latter, the many references to water cannot be unnoticed. The progression to the 
darkness of the water engenders fear/threat and suggests an ominous mood. 
For Part (d), candidates were asked to identify one characteristic of Will and provide 
supporting evidence. Acceptable response included: Will is careful/cautious (he takes his time 
to catch the iguana; he moves slowly and quietly); Will is a skilled hunter (he is equipped for 
his job as he has his stick with the loop and the canvas bag to capture and store the iguana); 
Will is attuned to his environment (he is alert to any changes; he notices the changes in the 
water, the noise of the howler monkeys); he admires nature’s beauty (he looks at the sunset, 
he has a deep desire to live close to nature). 
For Part (e), three marks were awarded for candidates’ explanation of how dialogue 
contributes to suspense in the passage. Not many candidates earned full marks. Acceptable 
responses included: it increases the sense of danger (when Sharper tells Will that militia 
scouts are around); it reinforces the mood of fear (the dialogue occurs in whispers); it 
advances the plot (informing the reader that the characters are moving towards the cave and 
that others are there, in hiding). 
Part (f) asked candidates to suggest why Will dreams of building a house by the creek or 
river. Candidates attempted this part reasonably well. Acceptable responses included: Will 
6
likes the beauty of the river (the sunset, the water, the enormous trees); Will enjoys the calm 
and peacefulness of the environment and he enjoys the idea of freedom (going to far 
undiscovered places) that the river symbolizes. 
Finally, in Part (g), candidates were asked to predict, with justification, what would happen 
next in this episode. Candidates, for the most part, gave reasonable submissions such as the 
characters will go to the cave and find the others gone; the militia scouts will track them and 
might kill them; a battle might ensue or they will reach the cave and get a chance to eat the 
iguana. 
Recommendations 
Candidates continue to underperform in parts of the questions which require interpretive, 
analytical and non-literal responses. Therefore, teachers are encouraged to continue working 
with students to hone their skills in appreciating and responding to literature. In the 
examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a careful reading of the 
evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that 
will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events 
described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some 
students use in their responses to the questions.
Students need to get accustomed to and use in their writing, the appropriate literary language 
and understand genre-specific words, terms and concepts such as mood, effect, suspense and
attitude.
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously 
successful attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their 
varied interpretations and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of 
students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence 
for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the study of 
literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 22 of the 
syllabus)
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short 
stories, poems and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, 
states of consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these 
to everyday living
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and 
synthesis (the ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn 
from various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question)
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, 
analytical responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism
7  The ability to produce balanced, critical analyses
 The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various 
techniques in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and 
behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the examination and most particularly in 
Paper 02
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature.
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1
For the questions on Shakespeare, the first was more popular. Question 1 sought to elicit 
from candidates, a discussion on the theme of love. Part (a) asked for a description of the love 
relationship of one of the couples. Part (b) required a description of the challenges faced by 
the couple and Part (c), a discussion of one dramatic technique that Shakespeare used to 
portray the theme of love.
Candidates showed a preference for the relationship between Hermia and Lysander. While 
candidates generally gave an average response, some concentrated on retelling the plot 
without focusing on the question. Of the three areas for discussion, Part (c) was not handled 
well. Generally, candidates were unable to identify and discuss the dramatic techniques used 
to portray the theme of love. Acceptable responses for a discussion of dramatic technique 
should have included any one of the following: dramatic irony (as in Puck and the love 
potion); personification of male dominance (as in Shakespeare’s presentation of male 
characters such as Egeus, Theseus and Oberon); use of contrast; the presentation of the 
magic wood as a reflection of the ‘real’ world; humour; Puck (as a character and 
commentary on love); allusion (classical references to Hero and Leander’s tragic love story). 
Question 2
This question pertains to the issue of the powerful and the powerless. Part (a) asked 
candidates to describe one incident in which one character exerts power over another; Part (b) 
asked for a description of how the character responds to the situation and Part (c), a 
discussion of one dramatic technique Shakespeare used to present male dominance of women
in the play. 
The most popular relationship discussed was Egeus and Hermia. A description of the 
victim/powerless would have allowed candidates to gain full marks for Part (b). Based on the 
responses for Part (c), it appears that candidates were not effectively prepared to answer 
questions dealing with dramatic presentations/dramatic techniques. Acceptable responses for 
this part should have included any one of the following: dramatic irony, personification of 
male dominance, use of contrast, comic humour and the character of Puck as a commentary 
on love. 
8
Old Story Time
Question 3
Part (a) asked for a description of one incident in the play in which Pearl is featured and one 
in which Margaret is featured; Part (b) required a discussion of how either Pearl or Margaret 
contributes to the development of the play and finally, Part (c), a discussion of the 
playwright’s presentation of women in the play.
Generally, candidates were quite knowledgeable of the text, although for Part (a) many 
mentioned Miss Aggy’s abuse of Len and not the taunting exchange between Len and Pearl. 
Also, some candidates failed to mention Margaret’s racist tendencies and disparaging 
remarks about Miss Aggy and Len. Part (b) was treated superficially. Pearl’s altered 
appearance to mark the passage of time; Pearl as a foil; Miss Aggy’s ironic adoration of 
Margaret; and Margaret as the symbol of perfection were acceptable responses for Part (b). 
Part (c) required a discussion of any/all of these women — Miss Aggy, Pearl, Lois and 
Margaret. Some candidates did not focus enough or at all on Part (c). Acceptable responses 
included the role of single parents; sex and sexuality; dramatic irony; women as symbols; the 
use of contrast and the exploration of issues such as class, colour and gender. 
Question 4
For Part (a), candidates were asked to discuss why Len wrote the love letter (to Margaret). 
Most candidates handled this part of the question fairly well but some were of the incorrect 
view that Len was genuinely in love with Margaret and not that he was only following his 
mother’s instructions. Part (b) asked for an explanation of the effects this letter had on the 
development of the play. A glaring omission for this part was the significant effect of 
flashbacks. Part (c) asked candidates to discuss how Rhone uses the letter incident to portray 
one important theme in the play. A common theme discussed was racism. However, some 
candidates discussed this theme in very general terms and disregarded the context of the 
drama. 
Poetry
Question 5
The named poems in Question 5 were “Orchids” and “God’s Grandeur”. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the view of nature presented in each poem; Part (b) asked for the 
comment each poem makes on humanity’s impact on nature and for Part (c), the task was to 
discuss one device from each poem which was used to portray nature.
Generally, “God’s Grandeur” was handled better, although a few candidates confused this 
poem with “A Contemplation Upon Flowers”. 
Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft), posed a challenge for many 
candidates. In many instances, devices were mentioned but the discussion was vague and 
lacked textual support. There was some confusion regarding the simile (which candidates 
continue to misspell) and metaphor. Many did not link the device with the effective portrayal 
of nature. 
9
Question 6
By far the more popular question, this was the general question and candidates were required 
to choose from the prescribed list, two poems that focused on the theme of oppression to 
answer the question set. Part (a) required candidates to describe the nature of the oppression. 
Candidates generally discussed the oppressive situation but did not identify the type of 
oppression (for example, political and social) experienced by the speaker.
Part (b) asked candidates to explain how the oppression affects the speaker and finally, Part 
(c) asked candidates to discuss one device from each poem which is used to present the 
oppression. Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of 
oppression. This part of the question continues to pose a challenge to candidates. Some 
candidates mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify 
the devices.
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are 
Type A questions. These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the 
comparative treatment of two novels. 
Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular. Question 7 referenced the chapters/stories “Miss 
Minnie” and “Travellers or Fathers, or Little Fool Fool” and Part (a) asked for a description 
of the person who nurtures the child in each chapter/story. Acceptable responses for this part 
included Miss Minnie and Cudjoe Man. Part (b) asked for a discussion of how each child is 
affected by the person described in Part (a). For Part (c), candidates were asked to discuss 
Forbes’ presentation of family in the novel. Responses tended to be vague and very 
superficial. Candidates who attempted this question did not do very well and many scored 
zero.
Question 8 
This question asked for a discussion of the statement, “In Songs of Silence individuals are 
often in conflict with the community to which they belong.” Part (a) asked for a description 
of one of these characters — Mister Papacita, Effita and Cudjoe Man. Part (b) asked for a 
discussion on the ways in which Forbes presents the selected character’s difference and Part 
(c), asked for a discussion of Forbes’ presentation of community in the novel. Candidates 
tended to narrate and describe events in the novel without focusing on the question. In some 
instances, candidates created their own narratives in a bid to augment their responses. 
Therefore, scores achieved were quite low.
10
The Wine of Astonishment
Question 9 
Part (a) asked candidates to describe one incident in which the villagers of Bonasse 
experience betrayal. Acceptable responses included Ivan Morton’s response to his roots and 
values; Corporal Prince’s abusive behavior and Bolo’s ‘turning’ on his own people in 
frustration. Part (b) required a discussion of the impact on the Bonasse community. Part (c)
required candidates to explore how Eva’s voice contributes to a deeper understanding of the 
community’s sense of betrayal. Generally, candidates found Part (c) challenging as they 
merely narrated Eva’s qualities. Acceptable responses for this part of the question should 
have focused on the fact that Eva’s voice is one of an insider and not an outsider. She voices 
the collective consciousness of the Bonasse community; she is able to recall the community’s 
past and traditions and show the changes and even as a ‘sympathetic insider’ Eva shows 
some amount of objectivity by neither judging nor condemning the motives of those who, for 
instance, move away from the church.
 
Question 10 
Candidates were asked to respond to Bee’s report of Ivan’s statement: “We can’t be white but 
we can act white.” Part (a) asked for a description of the situation which prompts this 
statement. Part (b) required a discussion of the effects of this statement on Bee. Candidates 
did not manage this section satisfactorily. Acceptable responses included Bee’s anger, 
disappointment, shame, sadness and other suitable negative emotions, with textual evidence. 
Part (c) asked candidates to show how Lovelace uses the characterization of Ivan Morton to 
explore the theme of whiteness in the novel. Many candidates did not make a strong enough 
connection between the theme of whiteness and characterization. Acceptable responses 
included descriptions of Ivan and his European look (dress, chauffeur-driven); Ivan’s house 
as a symbol (he leaves his father’s house to live in Mr Richardson’s big white house); images 
of white/light (his light-skinned wife being selected over the village (black) beauty, Eulalie). 
Short Story
Question 11
The short story section patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. 
Additionally, the short stories to be used are specified in one question, while for the other
question; candidates choose two appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer 
the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were “Berry” and “Blackout.” This question
asked candidates to describe an incident in which racism occurs. Part (b) asked for a 
discussion of the consequences of this incident and Part (c) asked candidates to discuss how 
the writer uses dialogue or characterization to present the theme of racism. 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward and responded well to the instances of 
racism, especially in “Berry”. For Part (b), candidates tended to narrate the stories rather than 
discuss the consequences. Acceptable responses included Berry’s baffled/puzzled reflection; 
his labelling people as “good” or “bad”; the woman in “Blackout” is forced to reflect on her 
sense of superiority; the refusal of victims to be treated as such. 
11
Part (c) appears to have posed a challenge to some candidates as they did not attempt this part 
while others made personal comments on the stories. Acceptable responses included: 
dialogue is used to establish contrast and reflect social/racial differences; it sets the scene for 
racial tensions to emerge; it reinforces the plot and conflict; it reveals characters. In both 
stories, characterization is used to reveal hidden prejudices and racist attitudes; characters’ 
actions are used to reveal racism and the writers use contrasting characters to reveal racism. 
Question 12
In this question, candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list with 
the same theme, in this instance the theme of relationships. In Part (a), candidates were asked 
to describe the nature of one of the relationships; Part (b) asked for a discussion of how the 
persons involved are affected by the relationship and Part (c), asked candidates to show one 
way in which the writers sustain interest in the portrayal of the relationships. Candidates were 
comfortable in handling Part (a). They were less so for Part (b). Acceptable responses should 
have indicated through the various types of relationships (parent/child; husband/wife; 
grandmother/grandchild; employer/employee) whether the effect is a negative or positive 
one. In answering Part (c), the positive or negative effects on the relationships require 
identification of the technique used by the writers to convey the message. Acceptable 
responses included: narrative perspective; use of symbols; use of dialogue; flashback, 
especially in creating suspense; irony, suspense and satire. 
Observations and Recommendations 
Although we commend teachers for their hard work, we are encouraging them to pay more 
attention to these areas which usually form the Part (c) of the questions: knowledge of literary 
terms and dramatic techniques; the ability to discuss and comment on the effectiveness of 
techniques and devices. We urge teachers/instructors to continue to emphasize and recognize 
genre-specific terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness.
 Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of 
preparation for the examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short 
stories) limits the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong 
arguments.
 Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama 
text to answer the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in 
such instances as this is a genre-specific examination.
 The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to
weaken the analytical element in essays.
 Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, 
strengthen vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are 
encouraged to find opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which 
target introductory paragraphs and finding textual evidence to develop one point 
(even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students to develop the required skills.
 Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as dramatic function and 
writer’s craft. Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer 
deliberately selected words or plotted events for particular effects.
12
 Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they 
must be constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are 
being tested (and not the film version, for instance).
 Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, 
describe, determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by 
dedicating time to closely examining the nature of the response expected by each of 
these and other key words used in questions.  While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and/or reading the poems, for 
instance, teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be 
empowered to master the language to describe, explain and analyse with greater 
clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening and speaking.
 Teachers must remind students of the potential of literature. It is not merely a tool or 
an instrument of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can 
help students to explore, question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and 
attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what sometimes emerged in 
superior scripts.
Candidates are reminded that January 2015 will be the end of this cycle and hence this cycle 
of texts. A new cycle of texts will be used from June 2015. 
Some candidates demonstrated the ability to organize an essay vis-à-vis introduction, body and 
conclusion. This was probably facilitated by the extra page provided in the candidate booklet. 
There was evidence of prewriting activity such as brainstorming, outlining and the use of cluster 
webs — approaches that facilitate essay writing.
- 7 -
Unfortunately, too many weak aspects of grammar and poor spelling were evident. Some 
weaknesses were subject and verb agreement, pronoun usage, past tenses and weak sentence 
structures. Strategies need to be developed to help students to value their dialects while 
appreciating the need to use the standard variety of English. The mean on this question was 16 out 
of 35.
Question 8 
This question required candidates to give their views on the statement “No matter how old you are, 
as long as you live with your parents or guardians, you should obey the rules they set in the home”.
The question required three areas to be addressed, age, living at home and rules. Many candidates 
failed to address all aspects of the topic and repeated the same points throughout. In instances, their 
writing lacked clarity. Weak responses ignored punctuation, lacked logical sequence and used 
transitional words and phrases inappropriately. The mean on this question was 15 out of 35.
Recommendations for Teachers
 The quality of answers in Argument suggests that time management is an issue for many 
students. Students would benefit from some coaching in how to manage their time. 
 Students need experience in (1) planning stories and (2) editing to get rid details which do 
not help the story. For example, students will give a long list of friends who attended a 
party when those friends have nothing to do with the outcome; or they will spend time 
describing a morning when they need to focus on the night the event took place. 
The points following have been made before, but bear repeating in this report since they persist. 
 It is clear that significant numbers of students have not mastered the use of Standard 
English. For students who almost abhor reading, some methods must be found to 
encourage correct use of the language. More frequent exercises in writing, including taking 
dictation (of short stories) will help provide greater comfort with standard English.  Teachers need to continue to pay attention to having students use their own words when 
summarizing and to employ transitional words and phrases in order to develop their 
responses into a coherent whole. Oral and written exercises should be used to improve the 
active vocabulary of students. For the more competent students, practice in construction 
shifts and equivalent sentences would be useful. 
 The teaching of comprehension can be combined with the teaching of summary as both 
require thoughtful reading and understanding of meaning.
 Students should be helped to focus on interpretation; much practice in listening, reading and 
reproducing meaning and in attention to accuracy is necessary. Sensitivity to how words 
and sentences work in the language is important.
 Students need to develop a firm grasp of language structure through exposure — if 
necessary, in class — to the reading of good literature. This includes focusing their 
attention to paragraphing, grammar, spelling, diction and other conventions of writing.
 Students should be given ample practice in recognizing and using the elements of story
writing and descriptive writing. Television watching is still a favourite pastime and can be 
a teaching–learning tool.











 














  
 

    
 








 
 
 
 




 
          


  

















   
 

 


 


 

 

 

   
 


 




 























 

 


 

 

 


 






 


    




      

































 


 


 


 

 

 

 

 












 

 
 


 

 


 
 
 














 

 

 


 




 
 

 

 







 

 

 


 



 

 
 
 
 








 

 

 

 



 
 

 


 







 



  
 

 

 



 

  

 



 




 

 

 


 



 








01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
2
SECTION A
1. (a) The staffroom of a school / A school.
(1 mark)
 (b) Focus on the scene and end of the scene. 
(2 marks) 
2. One of:
 -- he is contemptuous (‘bloody clowns’, ‘semi-literate’, ‘tongue 
like a woman’)
 -- he is cynical (‘expect nothing, avoid disappointment’, ‘bound to 
go to heaven’)
 -- he is intolerant (says nothing good about anyone).
 (1 mark for identification of attitude)
 (2 marks for evidence)
(3 marks)
3. Chaplain’s character comes under suspicion OR the audience is 
alerted to pay attention to the character to assess whether Pat’s 
statements are true.
(2 marks)
4. Any two of:
 -- the stage directions ‘synchronise his smash with the first stroke 
of the cane offstage’
 -- Chaplain’s acknowledgement (‘Ah, the Head’)
 -- the sound of flogging
 -- the stage direction ‘as he goes over to the headmaster’s door’. 
(2 marks)
5. Dacres is determined to make a good impression on the students OR
he takes the Chaplain’s comment to heart OR he is a conscientious 
teacher. His smile at Mica could have been friendly or may have 
indicated a more intimate interest.
 (an answer that addresses both stage directions – 
‘collects his things’ and ‘smiles at Mica’) 
(4 marks)
6. The irony is that as Chaplain he should be an example of care and 
compassion, yet he gleefully displays his lack of care for and 
brutality towards the students, even using scriptural allusion to 
support his attitude.
(3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
3
SECTION A cont’d
7. (a) Frightening OR horrifying. 
(1 mark)
(b) The synchronizing of his utterances with each stroke of the 
headmaster’s cane (‘rules are to be obeyed/whack; ‘yes, 
whack’) indicates his pleasure. He enthusiastically 
supports physical punishment.
(2 marks)
Total 20 marks
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
SECTION B
1. He worked non stop, Sundays as well as weekdays.
(1 mark)
2. Images: ‘blueblack cold; cracked hands; that ached from labour in 
the weekday weather’
Comment: The images depict the extreme severity of the weather 
and its punishing effect on the old man. ‘Blue black cold’ 
paints a picture of a winter so cold it has turned the old man 
black and blue – almost as if he is already dead. ‘That ached 
from labour in the weekday weather’ suggests constant, 
unrelenting exposure to the weather; ‘cracked hands’ suggests 
physical pain. 
 (2 marks for 2 images)
 (2 marks for fully explained comments) 
(4 marks)
3. He is selfless OR caring OR loving
(2 marks)
4. The speaker feels great pain or remorse as he reflects on his 
almost callous treatment of his father, the ways he had taken him 
for granted. This pain or remorse is conveyed in the repetition 
‘what did I know’ which sounds almost like a wail. The speaker 
realizes that his father had loved him though they had not 
communicated.
(1 mark for identification of the feeling) 
(3 marks for full discussion of the devices used to bring it across)
(4 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
4
SECTION B cont’d
5. Examples of metaphor: ‘blueblack cold’; ‘the cold splintering, 
breaking’; ‘driven out the cold’. 
 
Examples of personification: ‘the chronic angers of that house’
Comment: 
 -- blueblack cold – see question 2 above. NB: If this image was 
chosen for question 2, it cannot be chosen for question 5.
 -- ‘the cold splintering, breaking’ – conveys several pictures. 
Sound image – was the old man chopping wood to keep the house 
warm? Was there winter ice that was cracking as the fire the old 
man lit spread its warmth? This suggests that there was a war 
between heat and cold and the cold was giving the heat a knockout 
punch OR metaphor for tensions in the house – the relationship 
between father and son so chilling it is like winter ice.
 -- ‘driven out the cold’ evokes a picture of the cold as a live 
intruder that the old man is attacking.
 -- ‘the chronic angers of that house’ conveys a double meaning: the 
house so cold it seems the cold is angry; and the hostility or 
tension between the people in the house is as severe and long￾lasting as the winter.
 (1 mark for identification)
 (3 marks for fully explained comment)
(3 marks)
6. Examples of contrast:
-- heat (‘banked fires blazed’; ‘when the rooms were warm’) and 
cold
-- the father’s actions of love and the son’s indifference
-- the young boy and the adult father
-- the speaker’s boyhood self and his adult self looking back and 
reflecting
 
The contrast helps to evoke sadness OR wistfulness OR pain OR a 
sense of conflict.
 (1 mark for identifying a contrast)
 (4 marks for well developed explanation)
(5 marks)
Total 20 marks
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
5
SECTION C
1. ‘Rounded and curved’
‘She was the most appealing’
‘Her ... carried her like a princess’
(2 marks)
2. The writer repeats phrases eg. ‘but Granny (threw him out / put 
him off) in a humorous way to show the extent of Granny’s 
determination-no one below backra status was good enough for Miss 
Dorcas. It amusingly shows Granny’s determination to interfere 
OR Granny’s domineering control OR Granny’s possessiveness.
(3 marks for a fully developed answer focusing on effect of 
repetition as a technique)
(3 marks)
3. Her awareness of the opportunity for social mobility and her 
alertness in learning what she had to do in an attempt to achieve 
it OR her determination to get what she wanted.
(2 marks)
4. He is calculating OR he is an opportunist. 
(2 marks)
5. The writer sets her up in the backra-house where she behaves like 
the mistress of the house – the pride that goes before a fall –
and then he announces Mr Bill’s intention to marry a real backra 
girl.
 
(4 marks)
6. In paragraph 1 Miss Dorcas is a polished princess, in paragraph 4 
she has changed to a wildcat OR in paragraph 1 Miss Dorcas is the 
most desireable woman, in paragraph 4 she is devastatingly 
rejected. 
 (3 marks for a fully explained answer)
(3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B
PAPER 01 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME
6
SECTION C cont’d
7. Title should highlight ironies OR hazards of ONE of the 
following:
 -- conceit
 -- social climbing / snobbery
 -- the overriding powers of grandmothers / parental figures 
 -- ‘anancyism’
 -- any other reasonable theme
 (1 mark for appropriate title)
 (up to 3 marks for justification)
(4 marks)
Any other reasonable response must be suitably rewarded.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
HEADQUARTERS 
 
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
MARK SCHEME 
MAY/JUNE 2009 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
2
Rubric for Language and Organization 
Level of Performance Criteria
Excellent to superior
8-10
 Demonstrates excellent organizing 
skills: essay format with coherent 
presentation of points, effective 
linkages, well executed 
introduction, paragraphs 
 Demonstrates excellent grammar, 
sentence and syntactical 
structures, fluent or elegant style
Good
6 - 7 
 Demonstrates good organizing 
skills: points clear; uses 
introduction and coherent 
paragraphs
 Demonstrates fluent use of English 
with minor errors
Acceptable
4 - 5 
 Essay not as cohesive, but 
paragraphing used
 Several errors in language 
Weak
3 
 Weak organizing skills: very flawed 
paragraphing, or sectionalizing of 
essay answers, or little 
understanding of paragraphing
 Many errors in language
Very Weak
2 
 Little demonstration of essay 
format, few or no organizing skills
 Many language errors which hinder
meaning
Extremely Weak
<2
 Many language errors or too little 
information presented to make an 
assessment
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
3
Rubric for Content 
Level of 
Performance Criteria
Excellent to 
superior
19-25 
 Demonstrates in-depth and thorough 
knowledge of texts 
 Demonstrates excellent understanding 
of questions; where appropriate, 
makes comparative statements about 
texts
 Demonstrates excellent synthesis & 
analysis 
 Demonstrates appropriate & effective 
use of illustration/examples
 Demonstrates awareness, application & 
evaluation of writer’s craft
 Demonstrates sensitivity, personal 
response, and an understanding of the 
text as an integrated whole
 Makes appropriate value judgements, 
recognizes issues and thematic 
significance 
Good
14-18
 Demonstrates good knowledge of texts
 Demonstrates good understanding of 
questions
 Demonstrates fair -- good synthesis & 
analysis 
 Illustration/examples reasonable, not 
as many or as fully developed 
Acceptable
9-13  Demonstrates knowledge of some texts, 
or knowledge of texts only adequate
 Demonstrates fair understanding of 
questions
 Illustration/examples not full but 
reference made
 Literal level of analysis, may engage 
in story telling
Weak
5-8  Limited knowledge of texts
 Little or no analysis
 Illustration/examples flawed or 
inadequate
Very Weak  Very little or questionable knowledge 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
4
Level of 
Performance Criteria
2-4 of text 
 Little attempt to meet the demands of 
the question 
 Little or no organization skills
Extremely Weak
<2  Effort not in essay format
 No understanding of texts. 
Demonstrate high levels of 
unpreparedness. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
5
Question 1
(a) Describe what happens in this scene up to the point where Theseus 
leaves the stage. 
[8 marks] 
Hermia’s father Egeus has brought his daughter and her lover 
Lysander before Theseus to ask for is intervention in the dispute 
among them. Hippolyta, Thesesus’ Amazon bride to be, is also 
present. Egeus asks Theseus to force Hermia to give up Lysander 
and marry Demetrius, whom he has picked out for her and who has 
accompanied them to court. If she refuses, he wants Theseus to 
give him permission to dispose of her in whatever way he sees 
fit. Theseus agrees with Egeus’ stance, in keeping with Athenian 
law, which dictates that a father has sole rights over his unwed 
daughter — she is his property. Hermia stands up for herself and 
challenges the duke and her father. She says she is in love with 
Lysander, and will marry only him. Even when Theseus threatens 
her with the law, which stipulates that must either marry the man 
her father has chosen or stay unmarried forever, Hermia says she 
would rather accept the punishment than marry a man she does not 
love. She tells Theseus her father can marry Demetrius if he is 
so in love with the young man. Lysander and Demetrius both also 
have their say. Demetrius tells Hermia and Demetrius to give in, 
since his ‘right’ to Hermia’s hand is indisputable. Lysander 
argues that Egeus has no good reason to refuse him Hermia’s hand, 
since not only are he and Hermia in love, but he is at least as 
rich as Demetrius. Furthermore, Demetrius has broken faith with 
another girl, Helena, who is still in love with him. Theseus 
admits that he has heard about Demetrius’ treatment of Helena but 
has had no time to think about it. He leaves the stage, inviting 
Demetrius and Egeus to come with him so he can give them some 
advice and ask them to do some work for his wedding. Hippolyta 
also leaves with Theseus. Lysander and Hermia are left alone on 
stage.
An answer that mentions the role of all the characters on stage 
and outlines the central conflict in sufficient detail
(6 - 8 marks)
An answer that outlines the central conflict but omits some of 
the characters 
(4 – 5 marks)
A 
knowledge of
sketchy answer or an answer that demonstrates insufficient 
text
(Up to 3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
6
Question 1 cont’d
(b) What do you learn about Hermia’s character from this scene, and 
how is this view of her character supported by subsequent events 
in the play? 
 She is respectful but fearless ‘I do entreat your grace to pardon 
me/I know not by what power I am made bold’). 
 She is very determined to have her way. 
 She believes in true love over male law or paternal dictates. 
 She is willing to fight for her beliefs. 
 She is not intimidated by men — she defends her case in a court 
in which she is the only woman except the subdued Amazon queen. 
 She is fierce and passionate about what she believes in OR she is 
driven by passion. 
 She is heroic — being willing to stay unmarried in a society that 
looks down on single women (there is even a suggestion that 
Theseus means to put her in a cloister/convent). 
TWO qualities well developed - 3 marks each (6 marks)
How this view of her character is supported by subsequent events: 
She runs away with Lysander, braving the unknown, unafraid of possible 
consequences of being an unmarried woman alone with a man. Up to the 
point where Oberon’s magic takes over, she controls Lysander’s actions 
in the woods (telling him to sleep at a distance from her). When 
Demetrius pursues her in the wood, she curses him vigorously, and she 
even takes on Helena, who is bigger than she is, in a cat fight when 
Oberon’s magic shifts Lysander’s attentions from her to Helena. What 
is amusing is that in the wood Hermia throws off all the decorum she 
had shown in front of Theseus. Helena tells us that in fact she had 
been ‘a vixen’ in school. It seems that once she in in a free space, 
Hermia’s strong personality blossoms even further. Significantly, 
Hermia, unlike the men, never comes under Oberon’s spell. 
(3 marks)
[9 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
7
Question 1 cont’d
(c) Discuss the ways in which Hermia’s character challenges the 
conventional role of women in society. 
Hermia represents a radical challenge to strictures about women’s 
place in male-dominated Athens and by extension Shakespeare’s 
society. The entire play shows that these strictures hold very 
strong. Even in fairyland where Oberon and Titania are supposedly 
equal rulers, Oberon wants to rule Titania. The rude 
mechanicals’ play is about lovers who die because of similar 
social strictures against women in Babylon. Hermia is quite 
heroic and her attitude must have had a major effect on members 
of Shakespeare’s audience, whether shock, consternation, support, 
or joy.
She goes against the following:
 The (male) Duke has sole authority over his subjects
 Daughters are their father’s property
 Marriage is a market/business transaction in which the 
woman is sold to the highest bidder even if he’s 
dishonorable (Demetrius, by Lysander’s report, has jilted 
Helena after ‘making love’ to her, and Egeus must have 
known this since obviously it is widely rumoured)
 A woman’s feelings are irrelevant in marriage
 Women are delicate
 Women are/should be timid
 A woman who runs away with a man is dishonorable
Any other reasonable answer
TWO well developed points - 4 marks each [8 marks] 
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
8
Question 2
(a) Identify TWO of these worlds and explain how they are different 
from each other.
The worlds: the world of the Amazons; the fairy world; the upper 
class world of the Athenian court; the working class world of the 
rude mechanicals
Identification of two worlds (2 marks)
Differences 
Amazon (shown in the play only through Hippolyta, their Queen. 
Theseus reports that he conquered her and has brought her to 
Athens to marry him). 
 -- ruled by women, men not welcome
 -- serious
Athenian Court and upper class
 -- ruled by men/ Theseus, male power and male law dominant
 -- parental dictates valued over personal choice
 -- marriage arranged, love takes second place 
 -- serious
Fairy world
 -- has both King and Queen, with equal powers
 -- love allowed to thrive, is even magically assisted - law of 
feelings dominant
 -- both serious and comical
World of ‘rude mechanicals’
 -- freedom dominant—the men decide for themselves that they 
want to put on a play for the Duke’s wedding
 -- no women
 -- ruled by theatre/carnival (rules of playwriting and acting, 
Bottom as comic leader)
 -- humorous/hilarious
Discussion of two differences, well developed with evidence – 2 x 3 
marks
(6 marks)
[8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
9
Question 2 cont’d
(b) Discuss how Shakespeare uses the plot to connect the worlds. [8 marks]
The Amazon and upper class Athenian worlds meet when Theseus 
conquers Hippolyta the queen of the Amazons in battle and takes 
her to Athens to wed. Hippolyta is further drawn into the 
Athenian world as she is present when Hermia is brought before 
Theseus for disobeying the male law. She is also drawn into the 
working class world when Bottom and his crew perform their play 
at her wedding. Though she does not know it, the fairy world also 
affects her because the fairies come to bless the house after the 
wedding.
The upper class and fairy worlds meet through the lovers. Hermia 
and Lysander take refuge in the fairy wood in the hope of being 
able to find happiness and to escape the tyranny of the Athenian 
court. Demetrius, in love with Hermia, pursues them there and 
Helena who is in love with him, pursues Demetrius in the hope of 
weaning him away from Hermia. Oberon the fairy king gets 
mistakenly involved in their affairs as he overhears them talking 
and decides to try and right the situation by secret magic, with 
hilarious and often suspenseful results. The complications 
eventually get sorted out by Oberon’s magic. Just as all this is 
resolved, the Duke turns up in the fairy wood, pardons Hermia and 
Lysander and takes the lovers back to court. 
Working class Athenian and fairy worlds meet through theatre: The 
rude mechanicals meet in the fairy wood to practise their play. 
Their self appointed leader, Bottom, gets caught in Oberon’s 
plots, is turned into a donkey and is then kidnapped by Oberon’s 
wife Titania, who falls in love with him in his donkey form. This 
is because she has been put under a spell by her husband, who is 
punishing her for refusing to give him an Indian boy she has in 
her possession. 
Working class Athenian, fairy, and upper class Athenian worlds 
meet through theatre: When Oberon finally relents and removes the 
spell, the rude mechanicals emerge from the fairy wood to perform 
their play before the Duke Queen Hippolyta and the other human 
characters. The play ends with the fairies blessing the Duke’s 
house as Bottom’s crew finishes their play.
A full discussion of all the events that link the two worlds; must 
mention setting (wood, court etc) since in this play the setting is an 
integral part of shifts in events 
(6 - 8 marks)
A discussion of the main events that link the two worlds 
(4 - 5 marks)
A sketchy discussion or discussion showing insufficient knowledge of 
plot (Up to 3 marks)
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
10
Question 2 cont’d
(c) As these worlds interact, what similarities do you notice between 
them? 
Possible similarities include (candidates must discuss examples
from text for each)
 
 conflict
 gender wars/differences
 power struggles
 tyranny 
 complicated by love OR desire
 illusion as a powerful force
 any other reasonable answer
Any 2 similarities fully discussed 2 x 4 marks (8 marks)
Comment on Shakespeare’s purpose (1 mark)
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 3
(a) Briefly describe Pa Ben’s role in the opening scene.
Pa Ben’s role as narrator
Pa Ben announces his role as narrator by intoning ‘Old Story 
time, Old Story Time.’ After he sets the stage for the story, we 
see the young Len, his mother and later Pearl, his childhood 
friend. The audience sees first hand, the conflict between Len 
and his mother from way in the past. Issues of blackness, 
identity and advancement are brought across. 
Through flashbacks and Pa Ben’s narration, the audience sees time 
sequences: Pearl’s five pregnancies grow into eleven pregnancies; 
the young Len and the mature, accomplished Len, the Sly George as 
a boy and as an adult, are seen.
Pa Ben controls the action and directs the audience to crucial 
themes such as race and class issues. 
Pa Ben’s role as social commentator
Pa Ben introduces the audience to issues of history and culture. 
Audience is made aware of how things were in the past – limited 
advancement/social mobility for blacks. Living conditions were 
equally bad – bad roads, no water, no electricity. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
11
Question 3 cont’d
Pa Ben’s role as character
Pa Ben’s centrality as a major character is highlighted. He is 
neighbour to Miss Aggy and therefore close to the action. He 
interfaces with all the major characters and is Len’s confidante. 
Through Pa Ben, all the important themes are brought across. 
Pa Ben’s role as director
Pa Ben’s action in changing scenes as in his initiation of the 
song, “Change the house round” to convert Miss Aggy’s house to 
the bank scene with Lois and George. 
Pa Ben’s re-setting of the stage in putting the chairs back in 
place as he and Miss Aggy prepare to go to Pa Zaccy‘s nine night.
Pa Ben’s input in the action as he bridges gaps in the story as 
it unfolds (e.g. informing us about George’s marriage and 
commenting on it, describing his visits to Len’s school on 
occasions when he accompanied Miss Aggy. 
Any 2 points, 4 marks each [8 marks]
(b) How does Pa Ben introduce the concept of “old story time” in this 
scene? 
The concept of “old story time” is brought across through:
 His own narrative of the past – his father’s penchant for 
storytelling and the rituals involved (drinking rum, singing)
 Pa Ben’s repetition of “Old Story time, Ole Story time” to begin 
his storytelling event (a kind of call to arms/a summoning of the 
village)
 The events, places, people – all in the past, although he was a 
key participant and observer to the story he is going to tell
 Naming (his own name and reference to Pa Zaccy) 
 Common courtesies, for example “All well,” and reminding George 
that “thanks” is part of rural value system. 
Any 2 points, 4 marks each [8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
12
Question 3 cont’d
(c) How does Pa Ben’s role in the Act foreshadow his role in the rest 
of the play?
 Pivotal to the action – present or within earshot of most of the 
action
 Keeper of secrets (and Pa Ben being the balance between Len, Lois 
and Miss Aggy)
 Adds to tension 
 Adds to suspense 
 He continues to speak to the audience, bridging gaps in the 
narrative
Any 3 points, 3 marks each [9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 4
“Most elements of the play Old Story Time contribute to the theme of 
class and colour prejudice.” To what extent is this true of TWO of the 
following?
Characters 
 The black, brown/near white characters are presented to reflect 
the ethos of the period. The colonial society is reflected in the 
socio-economic and socio-political realities of the blacks being 
at the bottom and the near whites at the top and the typical 
demarcation of the underprivileged and privileged. However, as 
time passes, we see that in the later years (1970s) things have 
begun to change somewhat.
 Miss Aggy is filled with self-hate (“anything black no good’) and 
drums this into her son to aspire to Miss Margaret, the pastor’s 
daughter, with long hair down her back. 
 Using characters to bring across contrasts – the black Pearl 
(perpetually pregnant, who might have been different had she had 
the home support) and Lois, who was the first black woman to work 
in the bank.
 Exploring stereotypes and the irony involved – the white George 
(mongoose) is a schemer and quite dishonest (an ironic response 
to Miss Aggy’s belief that blackness is “no good.”)
 Len and Lois represent black people who are breaking the glass 
ceiling. Rhone presents them as very mindful of their roots as 
poor working class. They never come across as people who will 
show off on less fortunate black people. They will not adopt the 
colonial ways.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
13
Question 4 cont’d
 Pa Ben as wise, experienced commentator discusses the theme of 
class-colour prejudice in different ways. He criticizes Miss 
Aggie’s self-hate and George’s marriage.
Setting 
The technical aspects of the stage/staging and the physical 
locations/scenes contribute to the theme of class and colour 
prejudice:
 Miss Aggie’s house in the rural village, with chamber pot and 
outside toilet contrasted with the bank where upper class/near 
white George reigns supreme; contrasted also with Munro College 
where Len who is black and poor is abused by white upper and 
middle class boys. This setting is introduced by the sound of 
horse - drawn buggies depicting the domain of the rich. All of 
these together show how much the lighter skinned people were in 
control in the past
 The house in town where Len and Lois live. The fact that this is 
a well–appointed house and that they live on the same street as 
George shows that in the 1970s things are beginning to change —
black people are breaking the glass ceilings through education, 
ambition and intelligence.
 The fact that the same set is changed around to become all these 
various locations (for example, the song ‘Change the house 
around’ is sung while this happens) becomes symbolic that the 
class-colour divides of the past are not fixed in stone — change 
is coming.
Costuming 
The divisions among people based on class and colour are identified 
and portrayed: 
 Peasantry costume
 Miss Aggy’s market clothes, Pearl’s tattered attire, Pa Ben’s 
clothing
 George’s suits
 switching or donning pieces of clothing (hats for example) to 
indicate change in status (for example, Lois changing into bank 
teller’s clothes, Len in the present in suit showing he has 
breached the class-colour divide).
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
14
Question 4 cont’d
Flashbacks
Flashbacks contribute to colour and class prejudice: 
 The first flashback introduces the audience to the main themes in 
the play – blackness, identity, advancement, class restrictions. 
Miss Aggy beats Len because he associates with Pearl, the 
“frowsy-tail, jiggerfoot…board head gal”. She insists instead 
that he cultivate the friendship of Margaret, the “nice brown 
girl with tall hair down to her back.” 
 The time shifts allow the audience to make comparisons of events, 
behaviours and people: Len’s treatment at school by George, 
Margaret and the well to do; George’s blackmailing of Lois; Miss 
Aggie and George
 Flashbacks allow the audience deeper understanding of events and 
consequences, for example, Lois’ stealing to help Len and the 
subsequent blackmail; George’s threat of making an example of her 
race by exposing her.
Any 2 elements with any 3 points fully developed, using examples from 
the text, 4 marks each 2 x 3 x 4 (24 marks)
Showing that the two elements inter-relate (1 mark)
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 5
(a) Briefly outline the experience of the persona in EACH poem. 
The experience of the persona in each poem:
“Dulce”
A soldier vividly describes the horrors of war as he helplessly 
watches one of his comrades being “gassed.” Returning from the 
battle scene, “bent double,” coughing and limping with blood-shod 
feet, they had not heard the gas-filled shells being dropped. 
Most managed to escape, but this one comrade did not. The 
experience is traumatic for the soldier who recounts this 
experience of his unfortunate comrade and lashes out at all who 
buy into or are brainwashed into thinking that it is a good thing
to die for one’s country.
 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
15
Question 5 cont’d
“Dark Time”
The speaker describes his country at war and being taken over by 
foreign forces. The landscape is changed. All are sad, anxious 
and afraid. Gunshots ring out daily and even nature seems to take
part in this national mourning. 
4 marks each [8 marks]
(b) Discuss the ways in which EACH poet conveys the horror of the 
experience.
Ways in which EACH poet conveys the horror of the experience: 
The following devices/strategies should be connected to the 
horror of the experience of war. Mention must be made of how they 
enhance/heighten the feeling of repulsion/revulsion and general 
distaste of war. Sound and sight imagery must be linked to 
emotions evoked and mental pictures created in the mind of the 
reader. Figurative devices should suggest how the experience is 
horrible for the speaker and by extension, the reader. 
“Dulce’
Any two devices: 
 Vivid diction: graphic words/ideas – blood-shod feet; white eyes 
writhing; froth-corrupted lungs; blood gargling
 Imagery, especially relating to sight and sound: “thick green 
light,” “white eyes writhing;” “blood/come gargling”; (these are 
also metaphors)
 Simile: “like old beggars under sacks; ” “as under a green sea;” 
“like a devil’s sick of sin;” “obscene as cancer;” “bitter as 
cud”
 Metaphor: “an ecstasy of fumbling”
 Repetition: “all” in stanza one; “gas” in stanza 2; the many 
words ending with “-ing” and the choking/stifling feeling 
generated e.g. fumbling, stumbling, flound’ring, guttering, 
choking, drowning, smothering, 
 Irony: the title as against the poem itself (way in which the 
poem exposes this “lie”)
“Dark time”
 
Any two devices: 
 Repetition: “dark”/”dark time;” repetition in questioning (last 
stanza)
 Imagery: sight and sound, especially: use of colours (red flowers 
[blood?], brown beetles, dark time, strained and anxious faces; 
gunshots
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
16
Question 5 cont’d
 Oxymoron: “festival of guns”; “carnival of misery”
 Personification: “Red flowers bend their heads in awful sorrow”
 Metaphor: “brown beetles” could allude to army invasion
 Contrast: boot of steel versus the slender grass, showing the 
vulnerability of the people versus the brutality of the invaders
Any 2 devices well explained for each poem, 2 marks each [8 marks]
(c) What comment does each poem make on the subject of war? 
“Dulce”
Any two of: 
 Being on the battlefield is a horrifying experience. It 
dehumanizes people. Many are scarred for life. The feeling of 
helplessness and hopelessness is horrifying.
 Dying in the above - mentioned scenario is not noble. 
 The stereotypical assumptions about war and fighting for country 
are lies. Children (or the young and those anxious for glory) 
should not buy into this belief.
 The “old lie” is exposed and explored though what might be seen 
as an eye-witness account.
 When we have an intimate knowledge or experience (as in the dying 
soldier’s reaching for the speaker to help him) we are able to 
see what is taken for granted with fresh eyes.
“Dark Time”
Any two of: 
 War affects all. 
 War is so dehumanizing that even nature makes a statement (as in 
pathetic fallacy).
 There is a kind of helplessness that comes with war.
 War imposes itself on a nation’s culture (festival, carnival)
 War robs a nation of its independence and its dreams (“aiming at 
your dream”)
Any 2 comments made for each poem, 2 marks each (8 marks)
Any attempt at comparison/synthesis (1 mark)
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
17
Question 6
(a) For EACH poem, discuss the prejudice, showing how it affects the 
actions of individuals. 
A model answer will identify the type of prejudice, outline the 
context in which the prejudice is being demonstrated or 
contemplated, and discuss how and why it manifests in the actions 
of the character/s who practise it or are victimized by it. For 
example, a discussion of ‘Dreaming Black Boy’ in answer to this 
question should include this information: the picture is 
presented of a little black boy in Jim Crow America thinking 
about the ways in which racial prejudice as practiced by whites 
has surrounded his life and attacked his dreams. His teacher 
ignores him in class, he is given sub-standard education so that 
he will have to ‘lick boots for a living’, he cannot travel the 
globe freely because hotel owners might bar him from entering 
their premises. We get the sense that the boy is sitting by 
himself musing sadly.
[8 marks]
(b) Demonstrate how the poet’s use of any one device heightens the 
presentation of this effect in EACH poem. 
The model answer will also identify a device and discuss examples
of HOW the device works to sharpen the reader’s awareness of the 
effects of the prejudice. ‘How’ means that it is not enough to 
name the device and its effect, but to demonstrate exactly how it 
manages to achieve this effect. Here is a good example: ‘In 
“Dreaming Black Boy” the poet’s use of the repetition “I wish…” 
throughout the poem achieves several effects. For example, 
because it begins every stanza, we get a sense that the boy is 
constantly repeating to himself the ways in which he longs for a 
world without racial prejudice. This conveys a sense that the 
prejudice surrounds his entire life, and that he is in constant 
pain because of it.’ A less effective answer might identify the 
device, give an example and state the effect without showing how
we got there. For example ‘The speaker’s repetition of ‘I wish’ 
tells you that racial prejudice hurts him.’ The least effective 
type of answer will sketchily mention the device and the effect 
‘The poet uses repetition to show how the racial prejudice hurts 
the boy.’ The element of personal response—how the poet’s use of 
the device affects your own thoughts or emotions will enhance the 
quality of this model essay. 
[8 marks]
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
18
Question 6 cont’d
(c) What issues does EACH poet raise by his or her exploration of the 
theme of prejudice? 
The model answer will identify important general principles or 
ideas (the poet’s messages) that emerge from the poet’s treatment 
of prejudice. 
[9 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 7
(a) Describe what we learn from the narrator about the life and 
personality of Mister Papacita. 
 He brought joy to the children with his songs as he engaged them 
with the call and response communal activity
 Through the ribaldry of some of his songs he also introduced 
adult themes to the children and helped to bond the adult 
community through entertainment.
 He made work blessed as he blended his garden work with songs
 He beat drums and chanted at wakes and funerals and weddings
 He became a different person at weddings/community gatherings of 
mourning or celebration—physically he was transformed and he 
transformed others as they heard his songs and hymns.
 He was the perfect husband and friend to Miss Aita, except that
he refused to go to church with her. 
 A turning point came in his life when Miss Aita died. His life￾giving spirit left him, and he turned to drink.
 He became unruly and unmanageable, destroying the furniture in 
his house and leaving a trail of grief in the community.
 In his drunken state, he would call on all to serve God, as if 
Miss Aita’s churchgoing had somehow had a deep unconscious effect 
on him, or as if he felt unaccountably guilty about her death.
 After his hospital visits for detoxification he returned as a 
spiritless, tired old man, and rejected attempts by the villagers 
to lure him to church. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
19
Question 7 cont’d
 Then another turning point came—the climax of the narrative. 
Unexpectedly, mysteriously, he joined the staid Weslyan church. 
At his baptism his early spirit of music returned and caused 
several conversions, most of which did not last. He, however, 
remained faithful to his church. 
 The reader, like the narrator, is left with more questions than 
answers (silence) about the real reason for Mister Papacita’s 
conversion. 
A well expressed answer that covers Mister Papacita’s 
relationship with the children, the adults, the community as a 
whole, and Miss Aita; the significance of these relationships; 
and 
the issue of silence
the turning points in Mister Papacita’s life that introduce 
. [9 marks]
(b) By what strategies does the narrator reveal her attitude to 
Mister Papacita?
 The narrator maintains a child’s perspective on Mister Papacita, 
so her naïve puzzlement about the reasons for his change is 
convincing
 At first, like the other children, she is excited by and welcomes 
Mister Papacita’s singing, games, jokes etc. This is shown in the 
descriptions she uses (diction, images etc)
 The narrator expresses perplexity about the changes in Mr 
Papacita’s character through her constant use of questions
 She is confused by the change in Mister Papacita after Miss 
Aita’s death, and she uses the strategy of the community’s gossip 
to explore the possible reasons
 She intuitively compares the reasons put forward for the changes 
and shows her bias in the process—she reveals her preference for 
the colourful Mister Papacita, indicating that to her, he is ‘the 
real Mr Papacita.’
Any 2 strategies fully developed, 4 marks each [8 marks]
(c) How does the story of Mister Papacita’s life contribute to ONE 
theme in the text as a whole? 
 The theme of experience — how adults and children’s perspectives 
differ. (sometimes the narrator is young and naïve; at other 
times she is a reflecting adult seeking to make sense of life and 
events) 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
20
Question 7 cont’d
 The role of the church and its meaning and relevance to the 
community as a whole
 The nature and meaning of silence, the part that music and 
harmony, and chaos and noise play in expanding our understanding 
of silence
 The nature and meaning of silence — what for example is the 
connection between visible action and hidden mutation?
 Relationships — how opposites can attract. 
Any 1 theme fully discussed [8 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 8
Use the character Nathan to discuss the ways in which Forbes presents 
the theme of silence.
The chapters of Songs of Silence hold together as a chorus of songs 
from one community, but shaped by the recollections of a narrator 
whose perspective ranges from the innocence of childhood to the 
maturity of a young adult who emerges unbroken from a failed 
relationship. In the chapter ‘Nathan’, the narrator is the reflective 
adult with a sophisticated notion of the wide range of meanings 
‘silence’ holds. Through the character of Nathan she is able to 
present some aspects of this theme, which runs throughout the text in 
many different ways. 
 Nathan acts strategically without words, but with potent meaning —
revenge (poking Tony’s eye). 
 Silence is a characteristic feature of Nathan’s personality, which 
is deep and profound even though he uses few words. The absence of 
words can mask/hide a great deal.
 Nathan’s deep and profound silence was evident even from his birth 
and the close connection he had with his sister, the narrator –
‘…soulmates, welded together by our common need for silence.’ They 
both started speaking late. However, her silence was different from 
his — ‘he was a man of dark blue silences,’ hers ‘was a silence of 
moons.’ Here the narrator suggests that contrary to the saying 
‘silence means consent’, silence dies not always mean one thing nor 
are all silent people to be treated the same. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
21
Question 8 cont’d 
 The ‘manna manna manna mahkita’ game establishes the communication 
between the narrator and Nathan. It has unspoken personal meaning 
for them and suggests that its ritual is imbued with almost 
religious or spiritual significance. It shows that codes of 
communication that may seem meaningless to others looking on, may be 
a way of expressing connections that [known] words cannot express.
 The different silences of the siblings allow them to explore, define 
and find their own authentic selves in their own ways. (Narrator and 
ants, Nathan and tightfistedness with money). Silence, like 
language, can express identity.
 Forbes presents the narrator speculating on the genesis of Nathan’s 
tightfistedness — was it a reaction to their parents’ wastefulness 
or their loud quarreling? Silence generates questions that try to 
fill up the space of what we don’t know/what silence withholds from 
us. This idea is one of the most pervasive throughout the entire 
book.
 Silence emerges as fate — instrumental even in their adult years, in 
ironic ways, as illustrated by the fact that the narrator ‘entered a 
profession that fractured [her] silence’ and Nathan married a 
‘noisy’ woman. Silence is insufficient just as speech is 
insufficient—both Nathan and his sister look for their opposites in 
order to complete their personalities, just as Miss Effie went 
silent after speech betrayed her.
 Colours are a major element in defining the nature of silence, just 
as colours differentiated the nature of Mister Papacita’s music. 
 Water-river or sea — is also used to define/differentiate the nature 
of silences (as in ‘Morris Hole’). This is similar to the ‘snail’s 
shell upon my back’ in ‘The Woman with No Name.’
 Through these symbols and images Forbes helps us to understand 
intuitively the narrator’s conflict with her brothers, and Nathan 
particularly, as she gains greater awareness of her femaleness in 
response to their overwhelming maleness. Are women’s silences 
different from men’s, and men’s words different from women’s? (‘mine 
was a silence of moons’). These are some of the questions we ask.
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
22
Question 9
‘Bolo is a heroic figure whose heroism was not always understood by 
those around him.’ Discuss the character of Bolo in light of this 
statement.
Candidates do not need to agree with the statement. ‘Discuss’ 
indicates that a candidate may agree fully or partially or not at all. 
This question requires the candidate to indicate the definition of 
heroism that will guide the essay. As with other essays, scripts that 
make some reference to the author’s techniques indicate superiority. 
Candidates should include examples to prove their points.
Possible definitions of heroism: 
 defying great odds or dangers in order to fight for what one 
believes in
 sacrificing (for example, one’s life) for others
 sacrificing for others (for example, one’s life) even when they 
don’t understand us or our sacrifice
 having a vision of the greater good and being willing to take the 
lead in bringing it to fruition
 standing up for one’s beliefs in the face of great hardship, even 
putting oneself at risk
 standing up for others in the face of great hardship, even putting 
oneself at risk
 being willing to lead others in dangerous situations, in pursuit of 
high ideals
Instances of Bolo’s heroism: 
 At the end of the first chapter Bolo is introduced as ‘the warrior 
still’ who is shocked and heartbroken by the church’s self 
rejection. Warrior’ introduces the idea that he will be a fighter, 
his heartbreak introduces the idea of what he will fight for—ideals. 
Bolo’s idealistic insight is contrasted with the church’s pragmatic 
acceptance of defeat. Bolo represents an ideal and a promise. ‘
 Bolo fearlessly questions the dominant views of the group about Ivan 
Morton. He does not believe, as they do, that Morton is a man of the 
people or that talking to him will lead to their advancement or 
freedom from persecution. 
 Bolo is not afraid to defy the authorities. He recognizes that the 
colonial police are the enemies of the people and he feels ‘We have 
to kill Prince.’ He understands this at a literal and symbolic 
level. This contrasts with Bee and Eva, who as representatives of 
the church and the people, even accept their son’s application to 
the constabulary. Bee and Eva are heroic enough to break the law by 
worshipping in their own way, but they lack the radical daring of 
Bolo.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
23
Question 9 cont’d
 When he fights against Prince and the other policemen for arresting 
his mother among the worshippers, Bolo’s heroism is realized through 
his blood relations 
Possible points of view in response to the statement:
(i) Bolo is a heroic figure who was not given a chance to display his 
full heroism as the people he defended were too afraid to work 
with him against the colonial authorities. They did understand 
him but were afraid.
(ii) Bolo has potentially great qualities but he becomes mean-spirited 
and judgemental when his people do not agree with his approach to 
fighting the colonial authorities. A true hero is able to 
understand the people he wants to help, and does not humiliate or 
hurt them.
(iii) Bolo is a warrior hero but his people no longer want [or needs] 
warrior heroes; they want educated leaders who can use the system 
to beat the system.
(iv) Bolo is an anti-hero — one of those characters in books who rebel 
against everything an unjust and hypocritical society views as 
heroic. Through such characters, authors send a message to 
society, which often does not understand the anti-hero, and may 
even despise him.
Some points to support (i):
 Bolo is a stickfighter in the carnival tradition. So he is 
associated with the warrior hero. He is strong and bold and loves 
his people, does not think only of himself but of them. At the end 
of the first chapter he is introduced as the ‘warrior still’, who is 
shocked and heartbroken at the Spiritual Baptist church’s acceptance 
of the unjust law. He also tells them that they are wrong about 
Ivan Morton. He does not believe, as they do, that Morton is a man 
of the people or that talking to him will lead to their advancement 
or freedom from persecution. Bolo’s idealistic insight contrasts 
with the church’s pragmatic acceptance of defeat. His willingness to 
tell them the truth shows that he cares for them and that he is 
offering himself as their leader.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
24
Question 9 cont’d
 It is clear his people do love and admire Bolo, even though they are 
not able to rise to his level of heroism. Eva, the narrator, 
presents him in a sympathetic manner, and tries to understand him 
even though much of what she learns about his behaviour is reported 
to her third hand. As a member of the community that deserts him, 
Eva accepts blame for Bolo’s tragic demise and describes him as a 
crucified Christ. After his death she says he is not dead and hopes 
he never dies. By this she means that his memory, the memory of the 
things he tried to teach them but which they were too afraid to 
learn, and the memory of their shame and how they failed him, will 
live on.
 Bolo recognizes that the colonial police are the people’s natural 
enemies. The brutal officer Prince represents the worst excesses of 
the Police force, and it is clear from Eva’s narration that he is 
despised and feared. But while Bolo argues that ‘We have to kill 
Prince’, Bee and Eva, who can be seen as representing the church’s 
and the village’s attitudes, fail to send the right message to 
their son Winston and so Winston joins the police force. Bee is 
enraged and ashamed at this betrayal of ideals on Winston’s part. 
But unlike what Bolo would have done, he still tells Winston to go 
ahead. When Bolo says ‘we have to kill Prince,’ he means this at 
both a symbolic and literal level. Bee and Eva’s heroism goes only 
so far as to declare ‘we have to break the law’, meaning that they 
will worship in their own way in spite of the law against it. They 
are too afraid to accept Bolo’s radical solution. They are afraid 
for their children; also they feel defying the law by violence will 
only bring more violence down on them. Yet they love and admire Bolo 
and feel he is destined for great things (Eva’s descriptions). 
 Bolo matches heroic actions to words: he fights physically against 
Prince for arresting his mother; and fights Innocent for taking 
advantage of 17 year-old Lester, both in support of Lester and to 
show the community that they had turned against themselves in the 
most unjust way.
 When Bolo turns ‘badjohn’ it is still in an effort to make his 
people learn self-defence and courageous action. His rogue-like 
behaviour has a kind of logic in it – to show that he detested what 
the community had become. The trend of the community turning against 
itself was most represented by Mitchell’s exploitative and corrupt 
business practices, and Bolo uses ‘badjohnism’ to protest against 
this. He takes the two sisters as a challenge to his people; he is 
most offended by the introduction of the police in what he believed 
was the community’s business. Eva’s narration tells us that he 
looked heartbroken when this happened, almost as if he were pleading 
with them to have the courage to face him instead. (The one person 
who ever stood up to him was Charleau, and as a result, they became 
friends).
 Bolo’s tragic death can indeed be blamed on the community. It is as 
though he sacrificed his innocence and good reputation, even his 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
25
self - on their behalf, to no avail. Fear of the colonial powers 
made them impotent. Bolo is a tragic hero.
Any other reasonable point
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
26
Question 9 cont’d 
Some points to support (ii): 
Bolo’s great qualities include: champion stickfighter in the great 
warrior tradition of Africa and the carnival; community consciousness, 
idealism, and love for the people (‘...he don’t just fight to win 
battles for himself…and he do it with love and respect, more as if he
was making a gift of himself, offering himself…as if what he really 
want is for the people to see in him a beauty that wasn’t his alone, 
was theirs, ours…’).
 However, he fails to understand the real dilemmas the people face. 
Their fear for their children if they use violence is legitimate. 
Also, it is not easy for them to commit murder (‘kill Prince’), and 
they also want to promote civil society in which law works for them, 
not against them. They are trying to give Ivan Morton a chance to 
help them by legal means. They need to hope that one of their own 
has not really betrayed them. Bolo is right—they are shortsighted in 
not eventually getting up and fighting, whether physically or 
otherwise when it becomes clear Ivan is a traitor, but their point 
of view is understandable. Bolo isn’t able to see inside their minds 
but Eva as narrator is, and she gives a sympathetic portrayal of Bee 
and the others even though she too does not agree with them. 
 When Bolo kidnaps the two sisters and abuses Mitchell we lose 
sympathy for him no matter what Eva says. His treatment of them is 
inhumane and extreme. It seems he hopes that this will hold up to 
them a mirror of what they have become in their self-rejection, or a 
mirror of what the colonial establishment is doing to them. But how 
can people follow a leader who leads by fear or by terrorizing their 
children? How can love show itself in actions of hate? The tragedy 
of Bolo is that both he and the community became confused, one by 
disappointment, one by fear. Bolo’s confusion led to his loss of 
self and loss of heroism.
 Any other reasonable point
Some points to support (iii):
 The Caribbean has a long tradition of warrior heroes (for example,
Maroons, Three Finger Jack). The people usually love and admire 
them, but often they lead lonely lives as most people are afraid to 
adopt their radical means of resistance. Eva tells us several times 
that Bolo is ‘alone.’ Eva gives many descriptions showing the 
people’s admiration for Bolo’s physical beauty and strength, his 
stickfighting reputation and the fact that he is a ‘warrior still.’ 
But she also tells us several times that he is ‘alone.’ 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
27
Question 9 cont’d
 The people see Bolo more as a symbol than the leader they want. They 
do not believe in the kind of leadership he offers. They don’t want 
to meet violence with violence and kill Prince. This may be because 
of their cowardice or it could be because the society has changed. 
Eva says what the people need now to help them is the educated man 
who can take on the white man on his own terms. Eulalee’s rejection 
of Bolo for Ivan Morton is symbolic, as is Morton’s betrayal of her. 
 They pin all their hopes on Ivan Morton and even after he fails them 
they are afraid to adopt other means, and soon after, Bolo turns 
badjohn and they reject him even further, since now they are afraid 
of him.
 Going to prison may have brutalized Bolo and made him use violence 
against his people. But what it certainly does is show how alone he 
was — he is the only villager who went to jail because he is the 
only one who fought the police who arrested the church people 
unjustly (to defend his mother). It is most painful that no member 
of the group was sufficiently moved to join him. Bolo is a hero 
deserted by the people he fought for.
Any other reasonable point
Some points to support (iv): 
Anti-heroes are characters who do not have the traditional qualities 
of heroes, and often have opposite qualities to those of the 
traditional hero. They stand alone against society and are often 
disliked.
 Bolo starts off as a warrior hero admired by his people (see 
discussions at I, II and III). However, when he turns badjohn after 
the people desert him or fail to stand with him when he fights for 
his mother’s release, he begins to look more like an anti-hero. 
 Bolo becomes an anti-hero through his people’s fault (see 
discussions at I, II and III).
Any other reasonable point
3 marks for definition of heroism that candidate will use to guide the 
discussion.
Up to 8 marks for identification and description of Bolo’s heroic 
qualities and acts OR lack of such qualities and actions
Up to 7 marks for the interpretations of Bolo’s acts by those around 
him
4 marks each for 3 fully developed points about Bolo: 4x3=12
5 marks each for 2 fully developed points about those around him: 
5x2=10
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
28
Question 10
‘The Wine of Astonishment explores the ways in which power can be 
creative or destructive’. Dicuss with reference to one character in 
The Wine of Astonishment. 
Characters:
Bolo
Bolo’s power is both creative and destructive.
Creative: Bolo’s admirable qualities of power: Bolo is a champion 
carnival stickfighter who is looked up to and admired by the people of 
his community. Everyone admires him for this warrior prowess, and 
expects great things of him. The women admire him for his strength and 
physical grace as well as his sense of humour and community spirit. He 
is able to charm even the very old women. Bolo knows who he is and as 
a result is not afraid to speak out against the injustice meted out to 
his people or fight physically to free his mother when she is arrested 
unjustly. He is willing to take on the colonial establishment and 
‘kill Prince’, both literally and figuratively. Bolo’s power is 
multiple: the power of the warrior, the power of the charmer, the 
power of the revolutionary, the power that comes with self￾recognition. However, his potential to use his power lead the 
community and the church against the colonial establishment is lost as 
the people are too afraid to adopt his approach of direct, physical 
and radical resistance. They allow the power of the colonizer to win. 
This is the great tragedy of the novel.
Destructive yet ironically creative aspects of Bolo’s power: When 
Bolo’s power is not given its proper outlet he becomes a badjohn and 
terrorizes his people until they bring the police against him and he 
is killed. Bolo’s death however is not the end of his power. Eva the 
narrator says he is not dead, and she hopes he never dies. This 
suggests that Bolo still has power over the people’s memory. He has 
impressed them with his beauty and his strength. He has taught them 
shame, he has taught them how to be a man and not give in. 
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery — description of Bolo’s appearance etc
 Symbolism - Bolo as stickfighter symbolic of his moral warriorhood
 Contrast — with Morton,Prince, Bee etc
 Irony — Bolo/Christ rejected for Morton/Barabas
 Symbolism — Christ analogy
 Any other appropriate technique
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
29
Question 10 cont’d
Ivan Morton
Ivan Morton’s power is totally destructive
Morton is an agent of colonial power that oppresses the people. He is 
mentally enslaved. Worshipping the white man’s power, he turns against 
his own people and in a sense, himself. 
 colonial education empowers Morton to rise above the circumstances 
that oppress other poor blacks
 ironically, his parents’ sacrifice helped to give him this power 
through which he betrays everything they stood for (abandoning his 
father’s unfinished house is symbolic) 
 he has power over the people as they believe in him and think he 
shares their dreams and aspirations
 Morton trades on his people’s belief in the power of education; he 
uses education to trick his people into believing he will help them
 their votes put him in power, whereupon he promptly betrays them by 
feathering his own nest (new cars etc)
 he shows his allegiance to white power and contempt of his people by 
moving out of the village and into the white backra’s house, 
dressing always in suit and tie, deserting Eulalie and marrying a 
light skinned wife who approximates the criteria for white beauty 
and femininity, etc
 although Morton is in power, he does nothing to repeal the law 
against free worship, and in fact the persecution increases
 he keeps the people bamboozled by giving a few handouts and doing a 
few useless favours, for example, writing recommendations for jobs 
they can’t get
 in the end Morton is able to succeed because the people refuse to 
act on their knowledge of his betrayal, refuse to follow Bolo, and 
give up Bolo for Morton. This leads to Bolo’s turning against his 
people and finally his tragic death
 through this character Lovelace shows the evils of colonialism, 
fear, etc
Any other reasonable answer
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
30
Question 10 cont’d 
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery - (descriptions of Morton’ clothes, his nose that is always 
in the air as if sniffing something better)
 Symbolism - his always standing sideways, using two victory signs 
instead of one, the Richardson house that he moves into — described 
as a tomb
 Contrast — between Morton and the other villagers, between Morton 
and Bolo
 Parallels (with Prince, Mitchell, the Catholic church)
 Irony
 Any other appropriate technique
Prince
Like Ivan Morton, Prince is an agent of colonial power that oppresses 
the people. He is mentally enslaved, worshipping the white man’s 
power, he turns against his own people and in a sense, himself. His 
power is destructive.
 However, Prince’s weapon is not colonial education but colonial 
brutality.
 Prince is a member of the constabulary and he uses his position 
to brutalize the people. While other policemen will warn the 
church when a raid is being planned or will turn a blind eye to 
their mode of worship so long as they don’t flaunt it too 
blatantly, Prince pursues them relentlessly as if it is a 
personal vendetta
 Prince seems to be a sycophant who wants to show his superiors 
that he is not like these ‘backward people’
 he doesn’t care about his people, only about promotion
 Prince seems to enjoy brutality for its own sake, as if he has 
some secret insecurity that is satisfied by this power over 
others
 He seems to think his position gives him absolute power, so he 
doesn’t even feel he should answer legitimate questions such as 
‘why are you arresting these people?’
 Bolo challenges him by trying to incite the people to kill him, 
and then by physically attacking him when he arrests his mother 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
31
and the other church members. Bolo shows that colonial power is 
not absolute
 The showdown between them shows that Prince by himself is not 
really strong; it is only when a lot of other policemen come and 
beat him up that Bolo is subdued. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
32
Question 10 cont’d
 The lack of human care by those in power is shown when the police 
throw Bolo in the jeep without caring if his head is damaged.
 Tragically, no one except Bolo dares to fight Prince—they are 
afraid of the power behind him. Their failure to fight leads to 
Bolo’s going to prison and later to Bolo’s downfall.
Any other reasonable point
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery – description of prince’s brutal physique
 Symbolism — description of prince’s brutal physique
 Contrast - with Bolo
 Parallels - (with Morton, Mitchell, the Catholic church)
 Any other appropriate technique
Irony — Prince turns against the people, mirrors the people turning 
against themselves
Irony — people turn to police against Bolo and destroy Bolo in the 
process
Irony — Bee’s son becomes a policeman because of their failure to 
‘kill Prince.’
Irony — police/the law acts illegally to make people unsafe yet their 
role should be to protect
Irony — Prince’s brutality shows not his strength but his weakness—
bully
Any other appropriate technique
Mitchell
Like Morton and Prince, Mitchell is an agent of colonial power that 
oppresses the people. He is mentally enslaved. Worshipping the white 
man’s power, he turns against his own people and in a sense, himself. 
His power is destructive
 Mitchell’s weapon of oppression is money. 
 Achieving business success by craft and corruption (examples)
 Like Prince’s, the contemptible nature of his power is exposed by 
Bolo, who terrorizes him, destroys his shop etc. 
 Bolo stands alone as the rest of the village while aware of 
Mitchell’s wickedness, do nothing about it
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
33
Question 10 cont’d 
 Bolo tries to fight against Mitchell’s corrupt power by showing 
the people how Mitchell is oppressing them. His badjohn behaviour 
smashing up Mitchell’s shop is meant to show them in a mirror how 
Mitchell is a badjohn oppressing them yet they do not recognize 
this lesson 
 Although Bolo is destroyed in the end, he succeeds in erasing 
Mitchell’s illegitimate gains. The end of the book also 
vindicates him as Eva acknowledges that he had been right about 
fighting against men like Mitchell.
 Through this character Lovelace shows the all - pervasive evil of 
colonialism, fear, etc
 Rather than through his allegiance to the church. 
 Any other reasonable answer
Lovelace’s techniques
 Imagery
 Irony
 Symbolism
 Contrast
 Parallels
 Any other appropriate technique
Any 4 points fully developed for the ONE character’s qualities 
and behaviour related to power, 4 marks each (16 marks)
Any 2 points fully developed for the author’s techniques in 
showing the character’s relation to power, 4 marks each (8 marks)
Reference to other themes OR for demonstrating knowledge that the 
character discussed is similar to other characters in the book
(1 mark)
 
TOTAL 25 marks
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
34
Question 11
(a) Describe the central unfortunate situation in each story 
‘The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream’
Benjy’s unfortunate situation is the combination of his family’s 
poverty and his father’s attitude, and how these threaten his 
dream. Benjy has never seen or tasted ice-cream but his sister 
Elsa has described it to him in such magical terms that his 
life’s dream is to taste the ice cream sold by Mr Doran at the 
Harvest Festival Sale. This dream provides an important source of 
hope for Benjy, who is not particularly happy at home, mainly 
because his father does not always treat him well. This is 
because his father secretly thinks that his wife cheated on him 
and Benjy is not his. At last Benjy’s chance comes when the 
family attends the Harvest Sale. Benjy is full of excitement and 
terror, as he is not sure his father will be in a good enough 
mood to buy the ice cream Elsa has promised he will finally get 
to eat. And in fact for a while it seems that Benjy will get no 
ice cream, as his father is busy watching his mother to see which 
man she is talking to. Benjy is so distressed that he starts to 
cry, much to the disgust of his mother and sister whose 
impatience only makes him cry harder. At last his father, 
reassured that his wife isn’t clandestinely meeting any man after 
all, purchases ice cream for himself and the children. But there 
is a dreadful final twist. Just at the moment when Benjy, seized 
by fearful anticipation, tremblingly hesitates to taste his since 
cream, his father sees his mother talking to a well dressed town 
man, and in rage grabs Benjy and rushes towards his mother. 
Benjy’s ice cream falls to the ground, never to be retrieved. 
‘Mom Luby’
The I-narrator Elijah (along with his sister Puddin’) has lived 
with his grandmother Mom Luby for three years, since his mother 
died. His unfortunate situation is that he is at the mercy of 
his aunt’s questionably morals and engagement in illegal 
activities. He is subject to the wills and scheming of Mom Luby 
who seeks to milk the welfare system, bribe the police to protect 
her illegal dealings and expose the children to illegal and 
perhaps immoral influences in the process. Elijah is obviously 
very happy living with Mom Luby, but but after a while their 
financial situation gets so difficult that Mom Luby decides she 
has no choice but to seek State assistance. She takes the 
children to the State Aid office to put in her request, and 
shortly after, a social worker from the office arrives to assess 
whether Mom Luby is deserving of this aid. The supercilious, 
insensitive social worker is appalled by the family’s cultural 
habits and way of life (for example she scorns their food). 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
35
Question 11 cont’d
Mom Luby sharply and humorously responds to every rude criticism 
made by the social worker, who is increasingly discomfited. The
last straw is when she finds out that Mom Luby, the community’s 
‘matriarch’, who is not educated as she is, is ‘practising law, 
medicine, and the ministry without a licence.’ She decides to get 
her own back at Mom Lube by refusing to approve her for State
Aid. As a result, the reader is made aware, Elijah (and his 
sister) remain subject to the colourful but illicit activities of 
Mom Luby. 
4 marks each [8 marks]
b) Compare the writers’ strategies showing how each creates 
different reader response.
Possible points of comparison: 
 Senior’s narrative technique is heart-wrenching, Hunter’s 
hilarious. As a result we feel Benjy’s situation as a tragedy, 
and Elijah’s as a comedy — Elijah will survive; we are not sure 
about Benjy.
 Senior makes Benjy’s hunger for ice cream and the fact that his 
father may be a stumbling block to his getting this ice cream, 
central from the beginning, whereas Hunter makes Mom Luby’s 
feisty, hilarious personality central, so that we feel from the 
beginning that whatever the outcome, Elijah will be all right.
 Senior uses a carefully graduated series of images and events to 
build up the reader’s agony on Benjy’s behalf (for example, his 
terror is vividly described at every stage; and at several stages 
she outlines a possible threat to Benjy’s dream of ice cream) 
while Hunter has the reader laughing throughout as Mom Luby takes 
control of the situation (for example, at the very beginning she 
tells the children to shut their mouths — ‘don’t mess up my lie’
— when she tells the Welfare people she is their mother. At first 
we are worried that she might be a shady character, and she is. 
She is a street-wise character who attempts to exploit the 
weakness in the social system and we even applaud her for that, 
but Hunter also reveals Mom Luby’s consistent trait of resistance 
to the legal mores and requirements of the society.
 Benjy’s story is told from the point of view of a sympathetic 
third person narrator who feels his suffering and relays it to 
the reader as if from inside Benjy’s head. Elijah is his own I￾narrator who tells the story as an observer of Mom Luby’s 
indomitable self-possession and feisty strategies of survival. He 
never expresses any feelings of fear, so we know he is not 
concerned about whether he has shoes or carfare for school — the 
great Mom Luby will take care of it all. 
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
36
Question 11 cont’d
 Benjy’s story ends with a stream of consciousness (all his 
thoughts running together without full stops or other 
punctuation) to show his distress, whereas Elijah’s ends with Mom 
Luby gambling/playing a card game and laughing (showing her 
contempt for the social worker’s view that she is bringing up the 
children in an unhealthy atmosphere
 Any other reasonable point of comparison. Answer MUST show the 
contrast between the tragic vision in Senior’s story and the 
comic vision in Hunter’s story. 
2 comparisons fully developed, 2 marks each
Explicit comparison
(8 marks)
(1 mark)
[9 marks]
(c) Which ending do you prefer and why? 
To gain full marks, the answer must focus on the endings. It must 
state the candidate’s preference, which can either be one ending 
over the other, or equal satisfaction/dissatisfaction with both 
endings. The candidate must give clear reasons for this response, 
based on comments about either the writer’s technique; or the 
‘vision’/perspective (on life, on the child’s situation etc) that 
the ending encourages. 
[8 marks]
TOTAL 25 marks
Question 12
Choose two short stories you have studied and discuss how the MAIN 
character in each deals with a challenging situation. 
The essay encourages candidates to cover the following:
 Select two appropriate stories, correctly identifying the main 
characters.
 Provide a description of the challenging situation.
 Show how the character deals with the situation, and what this tell 
us about him or her
 Discuss the strategies/techniques used by the writers to bring 
across the challenges
 Suggest some theme that the writer invites us to think about.
01219010/SPEC/JUNE 2009
ENGLISH B 
PAPER 02 - GENERAL PROFICIENCY
MARK SCHEME 
37
Question 12 cont’d
Identifying and Describing the Challenging Situation 
Some stories present challenging situations on a personal level, as in 
“The Man of the House” where the young boy has to take care of his 
sick mother. 
Sometimes the personal may cover challenges such as confronting our 
own inner fears, problems, and prejudices as in “Blackout.” Here a 
white woman is approached by a black man as she waits in the dark at a 
bus stop. 
What might appear to be challenges to child might not be the case with 
an adult. In “The Day the World almost came to an End,” the child’s 
fertile imagination conjures images of the end of the world. Her 
hysterical reaction to an airplane flying overhead is humorous in its 
presentation. 
Often challenging situations exist in everyday life and play out in 
the larger political arena. “Berry” explores the sinister issue of 
racism, exploitation and prejudices. 
Other Points to consider
 Who is facing this challenging situation (is it a child, an adult, a 
male, female) and where this is occurring.
 What caused the challenging situation (is this of the character’s 
doing, some outside force)?
 How is the problem resolved?
How the Writer Brings Across the Challenging Situation
This kind of essay requires the identification and use of techniques 
used by the writers to get the message across. The challenging 
situations therefore, can be portrayed through the narrative 
perspective, symbols, figurative language, suspense, setting, 
flashback etc.
Story, 12 marks each (24 marks)
Comparison, 1 mark (1 mark)
TOTAL 25 marks
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2004 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2004
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2004, the second year of a new cycle (2003 - 2005), the overall examination performance was quite
consistent with that of 2003. Mark allocations were again indicated for the various parts of each question.
This helped candidates to manage their time more efficiently.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with texts and understanding of them, and
displayed a satisfactory grasp of the mechanics of writing. Still, avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and
punctuation are far too common across the board. Teachers and candidates need to be reminded that
there is no such word as “alot” in standard English; and that “all right” is the standard form of the phrase;
and that "its" is the possessive form of the pronoun (Every dog must have its day); and that “it's” is an
abbreviated form of “it is.”
Some candidates demonstrated a commendable ability to organize ideas into logical, well-argued paragraphs;
to frame their essays effectively with an introduction and conclusion; and to effect a smooth transition
from quotation to discussion. Too many, however, made little effort to structure their responses. It must
be emphasized that while the candidate is not penalized for sectionalizing responses, more marks are
given for a well-developed essay.
While most candidates performed very well in segments of questions requiring recall, most were not as
competent in analysing texts. Questions that asked for a discussion of the dramatic significance, or for
comments on poetic devices, for instance, tended to be poorly done.
Candidates need to be taught how to read examination questions carefully, and to respond fully or briefly,
as instructed, to all parts. Their attention should be drawn to the meaning of instructional words used in
the examination such as “Comment on,” “Describe,” “Identify,” “Compare,” and “Discuss.” These all require
different responses, and “briefly” means just what it says. They should know, too, that proper names
should ideally be correctly spelt, and the titles of works underlined.
Far too many candidates still disregard the caution that the same text is not to be used to respond to more
than one question, and many continue to use texts that are not on the syllabus. Candidates should be
reminded that they will be penalized for not observing these instructions.
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 8 of the syllabus:
1. Knowledge and Insight (Profile 1)
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of illustration
(c) Quality/Clarity of argument
2. Organizing of Response (Profile 2)
(a) Organizing (Structure and development of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs)
(b) Grammar and mechanics of writing (Sentence structure, punctuation, spelling, diction, etc.)
- 3 -
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
Section A tests
(a) description, analysis (that is, the ability to break down and select relevant data), and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form, information drawn from various sections of the
text), for the purpose of answering a particular question.
(b) the ability to support an argument based on reference to the text, a response to or opinion about a
play, novel, short story.
(c) an elementary awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, of the writer as a person who employs various
techniques in the shaping of the language and the presentation of human character and behaviour).
(d) an ability to recognize and distinguish between qualities of feeling as presented in a particular test.
(e) a grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
Section B tests
(a) the same skills as indicated for Section A. However, because of its focus on themes and the comparison
of texts, Section B requires an equal measure of analysis but a greater effort at synthesis to answer
questions adequately.
(b) an appreciation of the social content and context of literature.
Skills and Aptitude Tested in Paper 02
This paper tests
(a) comprehension.
(b) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet/dramatist achieves his
effect).
These skills require
(a) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function
in the passage.
(b) attention to dramatic devices, for example, stage direction and “props”.
(c) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
(d) awareness of the interaction among characters.
- 4 -
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01
Section A – Set Texts – Questions 1 - 14
ROMEO AND JULIET
Question 1
This question required an understanding of a crucial moment in the dramatic action – the Capulet feast.
Candidates needed to know the facts surrounding Romeo’s presence at the feast of his father’s sworn
enemy, what transpires at the feast, and the dramatic significance of the scene.
This was the most popular question of the entire examination attracting responses from 55 per cent of
candidates. Many candidates answered (a) and (b) satisfactorily – although far too many confused Mercutio
with Benvolio – but lost marks in (c), which required them to say why this scene was dramatically significant.
Teachers and candidates are reminded that questions on Drama will, in one way or the another, test
knowledge of dramatic significance.
Question 2
This question required an understanding of what is arguably the most memorable scene in the play.
Surprisingly only 8.2 per cent responded. Many candidates responded well to (a) and (b); but lost marks
in (c), which tested their knowledge of dramatic significance.
Romeo and Juliet proved a popular choice (the second most popular text) and, hence, an appropriate text.
However, there was quite a bit of film interference. Teachers and candidates are reminded that neither
video nor film ought to replace the text, on which questions are set.
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ knowledge of the final scene of the play in which the three most
important couples are present. It involved identification, description of the test that Petruchio suggests,
and the importance of Katherina’s closing speech.
Nine per cent of the candidates answered this question and many gained full marks in (a) and (b), but lost
marks in (c), which asked them to place Katherina’s speech within the context of the entire comedy. There
was, however, one perfect score on this question.
Question 4
As in the previous question, this one required candidates to know and understand a particular scene – the
wedding day (Act 3, Scene 2). Candidates were asked to respond to Katherina’s humiliation and anxiety
at Petruchio’s deliberate late arrival, to describe the choreographed appearance of a fantastically dressed
Petruchio, riding the most lamentable nag/jade, and to comment on the hero’s outrageous behaviour.
Only three per cent of the candidates attempted this question and there was no perfect score.
The Taming of the Shrew was not a popular text with candidates and teachers. This is not surprising,
since it hardly works as text in 2004. Only the most skilful actors can pull it off on stage.
- 5 -
SAINT JOAN
Question 5
This question required candidates to respond to Dunois’s initial appearance on stage. It expresses Dunois’s
love of art/poetry and his relationship with the heroine.
Only 2 per cent of the candidates chose this question and there was no perfect score. Most candidates did
not respond well to part (c).
Question 6
This question tested candidates’ understanding of events associated with the introduction of the Inquisition.
As was the case in 2003, Question 6 was again the least popular question of the examination. A mere 1.5
per cent of candidates chose it, and no candidate was able to score full marks.
Saint Joan was the least popular set book.
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
Question 7
Thirty-seven per cent of the candidates chose this question, which centered on the relationship between
the children and Boo Radley, and the majority of scores were between 16 and 21. Candidates generally
responded well to (a) and (b), but lost marks in (c). A number of candidates earned full marks in this
question.
Question 8
This straightforward question, which focused on Atticus’ character and the repercussions of his defence of
Tom Robinson, elicited the best overall performance from candidates. Twenty-seven responses earned a
perfect score, and the majority of scores were between 16 and 24.
To Kill a Mockingbird proved in the second year of this cycle to be the most popular set text. Its simple,
straightforward, linear narrative proved irresistible to 73 per cent of the candidates.
WIDE SARGASSO SEA
Question 9
This question on how Antoinette and her husband respond to Dominica elicited responses from eight per
cent of the candidates and there were many excellent responses, several of which earned perfect scores.
Candidates performed well in part (a) and (b) but experienced difficulty in explaining what the reaction of
Antoinette and her husband to Dominica tells the reader about the couple’s relationship.
Question 10
This question was more popular than its counterpart, and attracted responses from almost 13 per cent of
the candidates. Sections (a) and (b) were well handled, but (c) posed problems, no doubt because it required
a synthesis of knowledge and interpretation.
With 20 per cent of the candidates choosing Wide Sargasso Sea, it became the third least popular set text.
It is not an easy text at this level.
- 6 -
A WORLD OF PROSE
Questions 11 and 12
Question 11 was a popular question based on “The Two Grandmothers” and it was attempted by 33 per
cent of the candidates. There were many excellent answers and a number of candidates earned perfect
scores.
Question 12 on “Down Our Way” was much less popular than its counterpart. Both Questions 11 and 12
required a knowledge of only one short story, and this no doubt contributed to the quality of responses, as
candidates were able to cope well with the requirements.
Questions 11 and 12 elicited responses from 42 per cent of the candidates, and A World of Prose continues
to be an attractive option in Section A.
A WORLD OF POETRY
Questions 13 and 14
In Question 13, most candidates responded well to parts (a) and (b) but had difficulty responding to part
(c), the significance of the persona/speaker. In Question 14, (a) and (c) posed problems for many candidates.
There was only one perfect score among the responses to these questions.
Approximately 20 per cent of the candidates chose to answer Questions 13 and 14, 11 per cent less than in
2003. Happily, A World of Poetry continues to hold its own among set texts.
Section B – Themes – Questions 15 - 21
Question 15 – Love and Family Relationships
About 29 per cent of the candidates answered Question 15, and there were a fair number of very good
responses. Candidates handled (a) more comfortably than (b). Surprisingly there was only one perfect
score among the 5 243 responses. Choice of texts either positively or adversely affected performance.
Repetition of texts was the downfall of many candidates.
Question 16 – Freedom
Out of the 4 020 candidates who chose to respond to Question 16, approximately 25 per cent scored more
than 18 marks. While part (a) posed no real problems, part (b) proved a stiff challenge to candidates who
were less comfortable with comparison than with description, as required in part (a). There were two
perfect scores.
Question 17 – Heroism
Heroism perennially has been the most popular theme question. This year it proved to be the second most
popular question of the entire examination, attracting responses from 39 per cent of the candidates.
Candidates generally responded intelligently, but many had difficulty with (b), which demanded an
illustration of the effect of heroism on a major character. Scores of 18 marks and over were gained by 22
per cent of the candidates. There were four perfect scores among 6 938 responses.
Question 18 – Power and Authority
This question elicited responses from 22 per cent of the candidates, only one of whom provided a perfect
answer. Only 9.2 per cent of the candidates scored 18 or more.
- 7 -
Question 19 – Dreams and Aspirations
This question fell in popularity from 2003; only 28 per cent of candidates attempted it in 2004 compared
with 40 per cent in the previous year. It, however, was well handled, and recorded the highest percentage
of scores above 18 among the theme questions.
Question 20 – Women in Society
This question fell dramatically in popularity in 2004, in comparison to 2003. This is surprising in this age
of feminism, liberation and the fact that the question encouraged candidates to demonstrate their
understanding of how and why a female character triumphs in two of the texts studied. This question
recorded the worst performance in the entire examination!
Question 21 – Attitudes to the Past
This question proved to be the second least popular theme question behind Question 20, and was attempted
by seven per cent of the candidates. Only one candidate achieved a perfect score and as in previous years,
(c) gave candidates the most difficulty.
The theme questions (15-21) should prove to be easier than Section A questions, since both themes and
texts are known far in advance of the examination. It is difficult to understand why candidates do not
perform better on these questions. While it is not wise or educational for teachers to encourage candidates
to prepare full answers and regurgitate them on examination day, there is nothing to prevent teachers
from ensuring that candidates know precisely how to structure an essay on a theme question. The present
examination encourages and invites teachers and candidates to explore options. Since nothing is compulsory
on the examination, candidates may choose as many as three questions from Section A. With theme and
text(s) known, there is hardly an excuse for inadequate preparation. While teachers cannot vouch for
candidates' familiarity with texts, they can and perhaps ought to provide model answers. There are, of
course, inherent dangers in such a practice, but the advantages are likely to outweigh the disadvantages.
At least candidates can be guided to correlate theme and text(s), since this is so often the key to the quality
of response.
General
As mentioned on page 2, overall performance in 2004 remained stable. The drop in performance in Paper
02 was counterbalanced by an improved performance in Paper 01. Though no candidate wrote a perfect
answer for either Question 1 or Question 2, 9.08 per cent of those answering Question 1 and 13.2 per cent
of those answering Question 2, scored 16 or more.
In the questions on drama, teachers and candidates are reminded that "dramatic importance" is crucial to
any proper appreciation of drama. It is really about structure and discovering what a particular scene is
doing in its desired place and how this placement affects the play. At this level, the emphasis is more on
particular scenes than on the entire play. Beginnings, middles, and endings are always crucial to drama,
poetry, and prose fiction, and questions will reflect the truth of this observation.
Teachers are to be reminded that we are surely moving to an approach to literature that understands the
three modes as related yet distinct. Questions will reflect in one way or another the need to appreciate
how poetry functions as poetry and drama as drama. Questions on novels will reflect the need to understand
the organic relationship between character, theme, setting and language.
Reading prose, drama, and especially poetry, aloud with sensitivity can go a long way towards appreciating
literature. It can make the difference between merely responding to it and understanding how it works.
- 8 -
Paper 02
General Comments
In 2004, against the norm, there were more responses to the poem (Question 2) than to the prose excerpt
(Question 1): 9 294 candidates chose Question 2, while 7 875 candidates responded to Question 1.
Performance on Question 2 was marginally better than on Question 1.
There was no perfect total score in Paper 02, but there was a score of 28 in both questions. Thirteen per
cent of the candidates scored 16 or higher.
Both passages required an understanding of how writers use language to describe and explore the world
of ideas and emotions through imaginative structures.
Although the prose excerpt fictionalized Trinidadian/Caribbean history, both questions demanded of
candidates an understanding of Standard English.
Candidates who were adept at applying this knowledge performed best.
More attention needs to be paid to identification and explanation of figures of speech. Candidates were
able to recognize similes and metaphors, however few recognized examples of puns and paradoxes.
Moreover, while candidates were able to identify the figure of speech, in many instances they were unable
to explain how the figure of speech worked in the given context. This area of weakness is one we would
like to see improve.
There is still a tendency to extrapolate when responding to a critical piece and candidates need to be
reminded that they should confine themselves to responding to the given stimuli, rather than drawing
from extra-textual sources. In using the question as a platform to preach, some candidates became
sidetracked into irrelevance.
- 9 -
1 9451 55 24.73 8
Romeo and Juliet
2 1409 8.21 21.29 9 3 1615 9.41 22.86 1
Taming of the Shrew
4 508 2.96 12.40 0 5 301 1.75 5.65 0
St. Joan
6 254 1.48 12.6 0 7 6415 37.38 47.78 11
To Kill a Mockingbird
8 6598 38.45 59.23 27
9 1330 7.75 44.75 16
Wide Sargasso Sea
10 2186 12.73 35.68 3
11 5740 33.45 24.75 12
World of Prose
12 1439 8.38 30.37 0
13 830 4.83 9.53 1
World of Poetry
14 2561 14.92 19.76 0
THEMES
15 Love and 5243 30.55 12.13 1
Family Relationships
16 Freedom 4020 23.42 24.74 2
17 Heroism 6942 40.45 21.61 4
18 Power and Authority 3544 20.65 9.2 1
19 Dreams and Aspirations 4841 28.21 37.38 5
20 Women in Society 981 5.71 4.79 0
21 Attitude to the Past 1276 7.43 12 1
APPENDIX - 1
Question # Text/Theme No. of Percentage Pecentage No. of
Responses of Candidates Scores of 18+ Perfect Scores
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2005 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
-2-
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2005
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2005, the third and final year of this cycle (2003 - 2005), the overall examination performance was quite
consistent with that of 2004. Mark allocations were again indicated for the various parts of each question. This
helped candidates to manage their time more efficiently.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with texts and understanding of them, and displayed
a satisfactory grasp of the mechanics of writing. Still, avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation are
far too common across the board. Teachers and candidates need to be reminded that there is no such word as
“alot” in standard English; and that “all right” is the standard form of the phrase; and that "its" is the possessive
form of the pronoun (Every dog must have its day); and that “it's” is an abbreviated form of “it is.”
Some candidates demonstrated a commendable ability to organize ideas into logical, well-argued paragraphs; to
frame their essays effectively with an introduction and conclusion; and to effect a smooth transition from
quotation to discussion. Too many, however, made little effort to structure their responses. It must be emphasized
that while the candidate is not penalized for sectionalizing responses, more marks are given for a well-developed
essay.
While most candidates performed very well in segments of questions requiring recall, most were not as competent
in analysing texts. Questions that asked for a discussion of the dramatic significance, or for comments on poetic
devices, for instance, tended to be poorly done.
Candidates need to be taught how to read examination questions carefully, and to respond fully or briefly, as
instructed, to all parts. Their attention should be drawn to the meaning of instructional words used in the
examination such as “Comment on,” “Describe,” “Identify,” “Compare,” and “Discuss.” These all require
different responses, and “briefly” means just what it says. They should know, too, that proper names should
ideally be correctly spelt, and the titles of works underlined.
Far too many candidates still disregard the caution that the same text is not to be used to respond to more than
one question, and many continue to use texts that are not on the syllabus. Candidates should be reminded that
they will be penalized for not observing these instructions.
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 8 of the syllabus:
1. Knowledge and Insight (Profile 1)
(a) Relevance and adequacy of content
(b) Relevance and accuracy of illustration
(c) Quality/Clarity of argument
2. Organizing of Response (Profile 2)
(a) Organizing (Structure and development of relevant ideas or points into coherent paragraphs)
(b) Grammar and mechanics of writing (Sentence structure, punctuation, spelling, diction, etc.)
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
Section A tests
(a) description, analysis (that is, the ability to break down and select relevant data), and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form, information drawn from various sections of the
text), for the purpose of answering a particular question.
-3-
(b) the ability to support an argument based on reference to the text, a response to or opinion about a play,
novel, short story.
(c) an elementary awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, of the writer as a person who employs various
techniques in the shaping of the language and the presentation of human character and behaviour).
(d) an ability to recognize and distinguish between qualities of feeling as presented in a particular test.
(e) a grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
Section B tests
(a) the same skills as indicated for Section A. However, because of its focus on themes and the comparison
of texts, Section B requires an equal measure of analysis but a greater effort at synthesis to answer
questions adequately.
(b) an appreciation of the social content and context of literature.
Skills and Aptitude Tested in Paper 02
This paper tests
(a) comprehension.
(b) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet/dramatist achieves his effect).
These skills require
(a) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function in
the passage.
(b) attention to dramatic devices, for example, stage direction and “props”.
(c) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
(d) awareness of the interaction among characters.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01
Section A – Set Texts – Questions 1 - 14
ROMEO AND JULIET
Question 1
This question required an understanding of a crucial moment that turns around the drama. Candidates were
required to know why Romeo flees to Mantua. Most recalled correctly the fatal duel between Tybalt and
Mercutio, in which Mercutio is killed. Many stated accurately that Romeo feels responsible through his interference
for his friend’s death. Very few remembered that it was Friar Laurence who suggested to Romeo that he go to
Mantua.
Section (b) elicited a few detailed responses, but in the main responses were too generalized.
The vast majority of responses to (c) omitted the Friar’s advice and counsel to Romeo. Everyone mentioned the
potion (called “portion” and “position”) and its effects. Too many, however, gave information beyond the plan.
Question 2
This question required an understanding of the opening scene of the play. This question was generally well
handled; (a) and (b) gave little trouble. Section (c), however, indicated how badly prepared candidates are for
-4-
a question on dramatic significance. Only 8.19 per cent of candidates attempted this question.
Romeo and Juliet proved a popular choice (the second most popular text) and, hence, an appropriate text.
However, there was quite a bit of film interference. Teachers and candidates are reminded that neither video
nor film ought to replace the text, on which questions are set.
THE TAMING OF THE SHREW
Question 3
This question tested the candidates’ knowledge of Act 1, Scene 1 of The Taming of the Shrew. Sections (a) and
(b) were well handled by most, but (c) proved difficult to many. Only 6.30 per cent of candidates chose
Question 3.
Question 4
This question required an understanding of the most eagerly awaited moment in The Taming of the Shrew: the
initial meeting between Petruchio and Katherina. Sections (a) and (b) were generally competently handled, but
(c) proved to be the most difficult section of the question. Again, responses evinced how badly prepared
candidates are for questions on dramatic significance. Only 7.80 per cent of candidates chose Question 4.
The Taming of the Shrew was not a popular text with candidates and teachers. This is not surprising, since it
hardly works as text in 2005. Only the most skilful actors can pull it off on stage.
SAINT JOAN
Question 5
This straightforward question tested the candidates’ knowledge of the relationship between Joan and three (3)
other major characters. Neither (a) nor (b) posed any problems for the majority of candidates.
Question 6
This was a more problematic question for candidates. Like its counterpart, it required a knowledge of the
relationship between Joan and three (3) major characters. While (a) posed few problems, (b) was not well
done.
Saint Joan was in 2005, as it was in 2004, the least popular set book.
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
Question 7
This question was reasonably well done by the majority of candidates. Only Miss Maudie’s criticisms posed any
problems.
Question 8
This question was more popular than Question 7 and was well done by the majority of candidates. Candidates
were well prepared for (a), (b) and (c).
-5-
To Kill a Mockingbird proved in the second year of this cycle to be the most popular set text. Its simple,
straightforward, linear narrative proved irresistible to 77.10 per cent of the candidates.
WIDE SARGASSO SEA
Question 9
This question required a knowledge of a particular moment at the end of the novel. While (a) was generally well
handled, (b) posed some difficulties for candidates. Only 8.18 per cent of candidates answered Question 9.
Question 10
Question 10 was more difficult than Question 9 in that it required a knowledge of the role of two women in
Antoinette’s life. Many more candidates chose Question 10 than Question 9, and the majority of candidates did
both (a) and (b) reasonably well. Approximately 15 per cent of candidates chose Question 10.
A WORLD OF PROSE
Question 11
Although Question 11 required a knowledge of only one short story, (b) and (c) proved to be difficult for the
majority of candidates. Both Sections (a) and (b) demanded an understanding of point of view and the significance
of Hughes’ choice of different points of view.
Question 12
Question 12 was better handled than was Question 11 by the majority of candidates. Sections (a) and (b) were
straightforward, but (c) proved difficult for many. Few candidates went beyond the obvious.
Questions 11 and 12 elicited responses from 37 per cent of the candidates, and AWorld of Prose continues to be
an attractive option in Section A.
A WORLD OF POETRY
Questions 13 and 14
Neither Question 13 nor Question 14 was well handled by the majority of candidates. Sections (b) and (c)
proved problematic to many candidates as did (c) in Question 14. However, at least 8 candidates scored full
marks in Question 13 and Question 14.
Happily, AWorld of Poetry continues to hold its own among set texts.
Section B – Themes – Questions 15 - 21
Question 15 – Love and Family Relationships
About 29 per cent of the candidates answered Question 15, and there were a fair number of very good responses.
Candidates handled (a) more comfortably than (b). Choice of texts either positively or adversely affected
performance. Repetition of texts was the downfall of many candidates.
Question 16 – Freedom
Out of the 3 140 candidates who chose to respond to Question 16, approximately 60 per cent scored more than
15 marks. While part (a) posed no real problems, part (b) proved a stiff challenge to candidates who were less
comfortable with comparison than with description, as required in part (a). There were at least 4 perfect
scores.
Question 17 – Heroism
Heroism perennially has been the most popular theme question. This year it proved to be the second most
popular theme question attracting responses from 36 per cent of the candidates.
-6-
Candidates showed a fairly good grasp of both types of heroism, although some chose to show how the same
kind of heroism is illustrated in both texts. Thirty two per cent of candidates scored 15 or higher, and at least 2
candidates scored 29.
Question 18 – Power and Authority
This question elicited responses from 13 per cent of the candidates, only two of whom scored 28, the highest
mark. Thirty three per cent of the candidates scored 15 or more.
Question 19 – Dreams and Aspirations
This question rose in popularity from 2004 to become the most popular theme question. Approximately 46 per
cent of candidates responded to Question 19. Over 60 per cent scored 15 or more, and there were 6 perfect
scores.
Question 20 – Women in Society
This question fell in popularity in 2005. This is surprising in this age of feminism, liberation and the fact that the
question encouraged candidates to demonstrate their understanding of how and why a female character exerts
influence in two of the texts studied. There was at least one perfect score, and 39 per cent of candidates scored
15 or more.
Question 21 – Attitudes to the Past
This question, in the past, has always been unpopular. Again in 2005, Question 21 was the least popular theme
question. Although there were scores of 29, there was not a perfect score.
The theme questions (15-21) should prove to be easier than Section A questions, since both themes and texts are
known far in advance of the examination. It is difficult to understand why candidates do not perform better on
these questions. While it is not wise or educational for teachers to encourage candidates to prepare full answers
and regurgitate them on examination day, there is nothing to prevent teachers from ensuring that candidates
know precisely how to structure an essay on a theme question. The present examination encourages and invites
teachers and candidates to explore options. Since nothing is compulsory on the examination, candidates may
choose as many as three questions from Section A. With theme and text(s) known, there is hardly an excuse for
inadequate preparation. While teachers cannot vouch for candidates' familiarity with texts, they can and perhaps
ought to provide model answers. There are, of course, inherent dangers in such a practice, but the advantages
are likely to outweigh the disadvantages. At least candidates can be guided to correlate theme and text(s), since
this is so often the key to the quality of response.
General
As mentioned on page 2, overall performance in 2005 remained stable. The drop in performance in Paper 02
was counterbalanced by an improved performance in Paper 01. Though no candidate wrote a perfect answer
for either Question 1 or Question 2, 9.08 per cent of those answering Question 1 and 13.2 per cent of those
answering Question 2, scored 16 or more.
In the questions on drama, teachers and candidates are reminded that "dramatic importance" is crucial to any
proper appreciation of drama. It is really about structure and discovering what a particular scene is doing in its
desired place and how this placement affects the play. At this level, the emphasis is more on particular scenes
than on the entire play. Beginnings, middles, and endings are always crucial to drama, poetry, and prose fiction,
and questions will reflect the truth of this observation.
Teachers are to be reminded that we are surely moving to an approach to literature that understands the three
modes as related yet distinct. Questions will reflect in one way or another the need to appreciate how poetry
functions as poetry and drama as drama. Questions on novels will reflect the need to understand the organic
relationship between character, theme, setting and language.
-7-
Reading prose, drama, and especially poetry aloud with sensitivity can take one a long way towards appreciating
literature. It can make the difference between merely responding to it and understanding how it works.
Paper 02
General Comments
In 2005, there were more responses to the prose extract (Question 2) than to the poem (Question 1): 12 432
candidates chose Question 2, while 6 841 candidates responded to Question 1. It was surprising that so many
candidates chose what proved to be the more difficult question.
Six candidates got a perfect score on Question 1, while only one received a perfect score on Question 2.
Both passages required an understanding of how writers use language to describe and explore the world of
ideas and emotions through imaginative structures.
More attention needs to be paid to identification and explanation of figures of speech. Candidates were able to
recognize similes and metaphors; however, few recognized examples of puns and paradoxes. Moreover, while
candidates were able to identify the figure of speech, in many instances they were unable to explain how the
figure of speech worked in the given context. This area of weakness is one in which the examiners would like
to see an improvement.
There is still a tendency to extrapolate when responding to a critical piece and candidates need to be reminded
that they should confine themselves to responding to the given stimuli, rather than drawing from extra-textual
sources. In using the question as a platform to preach, some candidates became sidetracked into irrelevance.
-8-
APPENDIX – 1
Question # Text/Theme No. of Percentage
Responses of Candidates
1 7418 61.8
Romeo and Juliet
2 983 8.19
3 757 6.30
Taming of the Shrew 4 936 7.80
5 162 1.35
St. Joan
6 174 1.45
7 3453 28.70
To Kill a Mockingbird 8 5688 47.40
9 982 8.18
Wide Sargasso Sea 10 1760 14.60
11 2619 14.80
World of Prose
12 2619 21.80
13 788 6.50
World of Poetry 14 1086 9.05
THEMES
15 Love and 2280 19.00
Family Relationships
16 Freedom 3140 26.10
17 Heroism 4365 36.30
18 Power and Authority 1573 13.10
19 Dreams and Aspirations 6416 53.40
20 Women in Society 1193 9.90
21 Attitude to the Past 1052 8.70
N.B. Numbers and percentages are based on 70% of candidate population.
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2006
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2006 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2006
GENERAL COMMENTS
In 2006, the first year of the first cycle of the new syllabus (2006-2008) the overall examination performance
declined from that of 2005. In 2006 44.65 per cent of candidates achieved Grades III and above compared
with 58.93 per cent in 2005. Mark allocations were indicated for the various parts of the questions on drama
and on poetry. Mark allocations were not indicated for the prose questions, so students faced an additional
challenge here of structuring the essay without guidance.
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with the texts, and there was evidence of an
increased personal involvement with the material and an emotional response to the conflicts and struggles
being discussed. Avoidable errors in grammar, spelling and punctuation were still too frequent. Teachers
should ensure that students can spell words that they will inevitably need when writing on a specific text:
Macbeth, for instance, stole the throne (not thrown), he was a valiant soldier (not “solider”) and he was misled
by the witches’ prophecies (not “profisies”) or some such variant). The spelling of proper names should be
mastered before the examination, and titles of texts should be underlined.
Some candidates demonstrated excellent ability in organising their responses into logical, well-developed
paragraphs and used smooth transitions to form those paragraphs into a well-crafted essay, complete with an
introduction and a conclusion. They were able to introduce relevant quotations and move from quotation to
discussion. Too many candidates, though, wrote sectionalised responses to the different parts of the question
(sometimes even on separate pages) instead of using the question breakdown to shape their responses into
a flowing essay.
Again this year, parts of questions that required simple recall were generally done well, but weaker candidates
were not so competent when called on to analyse situations. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic
devices or poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the “story”.
Since this new syllabus is genre-based, it is important for teachers to guide students to examine dramatic and
poetic devices and to be able to discuss their effectiveness. A large number of students simply omitted the part
of the question requiring comments on dramatic or poetic devices. Candidates need to be reminded of the
importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in the prose fiction section where there is no
sectionalising to prompt them. Words such as “Comment on”, “Identify”, “Discuss”, “Compare” require different
responses, and candidates must be taught how to answer such questions.
Teachers should discuss with students the importance of care in selecting their questions. This year many
candidates opted to do questions for which they were unprepared—particularly in the prose fiction section of
the paper. The question which dealt with a schooldays experience, for instance, was not suitable if the candidate
was prepared to write only on The Pearl and Green Days by the River. Students also need to be taught, to focus
on the specific requirements of the question and answer each part as thoroughly as possible with supporting
evidence from the text—not to narrate the story, and not to write everything they know whether relevant or not.
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. Quite a large number of
candidates wrote on both of the plays, wasting time and losing marks in the process.
- 3 -
The following table shows a breakdown of the candidates’ choices.
APPENDIX - 1
No Percentage
 Question # Text of Responses of Candidates
Drama 1 Macbeth 8161 42.3
 2 5917 30.7
 3 Glass Menagerie 1523 7.9
 4 3714 19.2
Poetry 5 World of Poetry 16246 84.2
 6 2761 14.3
Prose 7 9525 49.4
 8 * 6420 33.3
 9 1271 6.6
10 1841 9.5
* Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for comparison from
the following:
West Indian
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony
Non West Indian
A Separate Peace John Knowles
The Pearl John Steinbeck
Intention of Questions
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus:
Understanding
Knowledge of Text and Insight
i) Relevance and adequacy of content
ii) Relevance and accuracy of examples
Expression
Organisation of Response
i) Structure and development of responses
ii) Clear and logical argument
- 4 -
Quality of Language
i) Clarity and appropriateness of expression used
ii) Mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling)
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01
This paper tests
i) comprehension
ii) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
These skills require
i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example,
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function
effectively in the passage.
ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and “props”.
iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive.
iv) awareness of the interaction among characters.
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus)
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts
explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living.
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question).
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism.
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses.
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested throughout
the examination and most particularly in Paper 02.
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text.
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature.
General Comments on Student Performance in Paper 01
Because this new syllabus is genre-specific, it will be necessary for teachers to devote more time to dealing
with poetic and dramatic devices, and to look more closely at the strategies used by prose writers—setting,
characterization, dialogue, and so on. Students have to be sensitised to the undercurrents of mood, conflict and
irony in drama, and need to understand how the stage directions function. In poetry, they need to be enabled to
recognise when metaphoric language is being used, and not insist on a literal reading.
- 5 -
A few candidates attempted to write in essay format in Paper 1. Students need to be advised that each answer
should be written on a separate line. In addition, each genre should start on a new page.
Question 1: Drama
Most candidates responded with compassion to the situation of Annie and Carlton. Many candidates did not
understand that Annie wanted a job, but went for limited responses: she needed bread, money or a place to
stay. In responding to Question (c) about Jean’s entrance, many candidates confused entrance with presence,
and commented on the effect on Annie of Jean’s entrance instead of the change of mood that would affect the
audience. Few candidates gained full marks on Question (d) which required them to examine the words “gentle
irony” (i.e. both gentle and ironic), and some students did not know the meaning of “radiant” and so had
difficulty with Question (e). For Question (f) few candidates saw the contrast between Carlton and Jean (e.g.
class) and some did not understand the word “impact.” A few candidates gained full marks for this last question.
Question 2: Poetry
Question (a), many candidates kept to the literal level, not seeing the sleep/death metaphor in the poem.
Others, misreading the poem in another way, maintained that the forest imagery was the literal meaning of the
poem, and for Question (e) they discussed “process” using terms like deforestation, evaporation, condensation
and photosynthesis. This tendency to hold on to a perceived literal meaning proved the downfall of many
candidates.
Question 3: Prose
Candidates evidently found this passage exciting, and responses for the most part were satisfactory. Many,
though, did not realise that Jonathan was a seagull. Many did not understand the phrase “terminal velocity”
Question (c), and many could not identify examples of poetic language in the passage or explain what was
poetic about those examples.
Paper 02
Section A – Drama – Questions 1 - 4
MACBETH
Too many candidates attempted questions on both of the plays. Only one question must be selected from
this section.
Question 1
This question required an understanding of Macbeth’s guilty fears and his ambitious desires after the killing of
Duncan. It also required an understanding of irony as a literary device, and invited the candidate to link
Macbeth’s illicit rise to power with his tragic downfall, so tracing the justice implicit in the unfolding of
events. The section on irony proved difficult for some candidates, and weaker ones tended to provide vague
comments on the topic of justice, not providing specific supporting evidence from the play.
Question 2
This question focused on Macduff’s motive for revenge and his role in Macbeth’s downfall. Many candidates
ignored the words “at that time”, and wrote about Macbeth’s fears of Macduff later in the play. Section (b) was
generally adequately done, but section (c) proved challenging. Candidates were sometimes not able to distinguish
between Macduff’s role and his suitability as an avenger. Most dealt well with the rallying of forces against the
tyrant and with Macduff’s personal revenge; only the better students understood that Macduff, since he himself
was not going to be king, was God’s righteous tool in delivering Scotland from the usurper.
- 6 -
Candidates were almost unanimous in describing Macduff as having been born by Caesarean section. Surely,
though, “from his mother’s womb untimely ripp’d” presents us with a much less sanitised image; presumably
he was either cut from his mother after her death or he miraculously survived when his mother’s belly was
brutally ripped open by invading soldiers.
Candidates need to know that the words “Say whether he is a fit avenger” require more than a yes/no response.
Supporting evidence is always required.
THE GLASS MENAGERIE
Question 3
Candidates were asked to say what could be learnt from the setting as the curtain rises on the play, to relate the
sequence of events in the first scene and to outline the major themes that emerge in this scene. Most were able
to identify aspects of setting, but did not say what we could learn from them. Most were able to relate the
events, though not in the correct order, and some drew on material from outside this scene. The last part of the
question tended to be poorly done, with candidates listing the “themes” from the last syllabus (love and family
relationships, freedom, power and authority, etc.) without linking them to what they observed in the events and
setting of this scene.
Question 4
This question focused on the influence of men on powerful women (Mr Wingfield/Amanda) and oppressed
women (Jim/ Laura). The most challenging part of the question was the section in which candidates were
required to say how Williams makes Wingfield’s influence appear “dramatically striking”. Here it became
evident that the play’s dramatic devices had not been adequately dealt with by teachers. Many candidates
correctly identified the life-size photo of Wingfield as an example of a device that is “dramatically striking”,
but ignored the prompt telling them that 6 marks were available, and failed to expand on the impact of the
photo.
Section B – Poetry – Questions 5 - 6
General comments.
Examiners noticed a widespread absence of any evidence that candidates were being taught to read poetry as
a genre. Many candidate scored their marks on the (a) and (b) parts of the poetry questions, but were very
weak on the (c) part, the part that tests for understanding of the genre. Many candidates had no idea what an
image was and gave narrative instead of image in answer to Question 5c. The narrative merely repeated the
material in parts (a) or (b), the basic recall and comprehension sections.
Some candidates who were able to correctly select images, did not know what to do with them, so they simply
listed or paraphrased the relevant quotations. Others were a bit stronger and were able to say what the effect of
the image was, but very few were able to say HOW the image worked to achieve this effect. It is important that
students be taught the basic vocabulary of poetry (terms such as ‘image’ for example cannot be given layman’s
interpretations), be able to identify and NAME basic figures of speech (e.g. simile, metaphor, alliteration), be
able to identify basic structural devices (repetition, rhyme) and be able to explain HOW in particular poems these
devices work to create certain meanings and effects. This does not mean students are expected to exhibit the
sophistication of a CAPE student. But the fact that significant numbers were able to handle Section c of both
questions indicates that these requirements are not unrealistic. They are in fact an excellent preparation for
CAPE.
- 7 -
Question 5
Students clearly enjoyed these two poems and wrote with conviction. However, they need to be taught the
skills of writing a comparative analysis. Many listed the characteristics of one mother and then those of the
other instead of finding points of comparison to show the ways in which the two women are similar/are
different.
Question 6
Martin Carter’s poem proved more accessible to students than Auden’s. Candidates were able to identify the
oppressors, but were not so sure about what they do. The section requiring candidates to say what makes the
oppressors appear mysterious was clearly problematic. Candidates generally wrote fairly well on the horror
communicated in each poem. A number of candidates were able to write well on the way Auden uses the sonnet
form to achieve his purpose, and many, too, were able to discuss the effect of the oxymorons and other devices
that Carter employs.
Section C – Prose Fiction – Questions 7 – 10
General Comments
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. Texts
from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. Students
must be advised on choosing a question appropriate to the two texts they wish to write on. To choose The Pearl
to write about an experience from schooldays was plain foolhardy!
Students must be taught to focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story of the
novel. The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is
used explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring out
points of similarity and difference.
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalised, candidates need to be guided by teachers on how to
structure their essays. Generally each essay will fall into four parts—two parts for each novel. For instance, in
Question 7, it was necessary (a) to identify and explain the challenge faced, and then (b) to show the ways in
which the major character moved to maturity as he/she faced that challenge. In Question 8, the candidate
needed (a) to describe the way that class prejudice expressed itself in the society depicted, and then (b) to show
how the major character was affected by that prejudice. Students need to be shown how to read the question,
to break it down into its component sections and then to write about each section as fully as possible. A
reasonable rule of thumb would be to assume approximately equal marks for each of the four sections.
Generally it was found that candidates had a grasp of the story line, but often had not taken time to probe into
the deep conflicts and moral questions beneath the surface. More class discussion of issues presented in the
novels seems to be called for.
Question 7
Candidates who did well in this question were those who were able to identify life’s challenges and analyse
ways in which dealing with those challenges had transformed the major character into a mature person. They
were able to “use” the novels to support the points they made and presented their points in a clear, logical
manner.
- 8 -
Question 8
Surprisingly few candidates used Crick Crack Monkey to respond to this question, though it would have been
eminently suitable, and many used A Separate Peace , which was certainly not the wisest choice. Social class
was not always identified. Misreadings abounded: Kino in The Pearl was considered to be “greedy” instead of
ambitious, and was accused of “wanting to be like the same whites he despised”; Mr Gidharee in Green Days
was seen as an “exploiter/manipulator” rather than as being interested in Shell’s welfare. Candidates working
with Crick Crack Monkey compared Tantie and Aunt Beatrice instead of addressing the question.
Question 9
Only A Separate Peace and Crick Crack Monkey were suitable choices for this question, and students who
chose the other two texts handicapped themselves from the outset. Surprisingly, since it asked for discussion of
a schooldays experience, the question was generally not well done. Quite a few candidates moved away from
the novels to relate their own schooldays experiences. They need to be reminded that while literature often
mirrors our own experiences, all examples supporting points made must be from the literary texts.
Question 10
This question on setting was well done, which suggests that teachers are focusing more on the techniques of
the novelist. This is encouraging. Green Days and The Pearl were the popular choices, though A Separate
Peace allowed for rich discussion by candidates who had fully understood the symbolism used extensively in
this novel.
General
Overall performance in 2006 remained stable. Candidates tended to do better in Paper 1 than in Paper 2. This
is probably because students need more help with essay-writing skills. In the poetry questions, particularly,
more development of points was required. Narration was a problem in the responses to questions on prose
fiction.
Teachers are reminded that this syllabus focuses on the three genres, and candidates will be examined
accordingly. For drama, candidates need to be able to consider a given scene in detail and show how its events,
mood and placement contribute to the play. For poetry, candidates need to be able to identify and discuss the
effectiveness of poetic devices and to move from quotation to analysis. For prose fiction, candidates need to
move away from re-telling the story to focusing on the requirements of the question. Aspects of the novel like
character, conflict, theme, and language all need to be discussed in the classroom. In all three genres, candidates
should be urged to write their answers in well-constructed, logically flowing essays; it is not satisfactory for
them to present a sectionalised answer.
C A R I B B E A N E X AM I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON THE CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE 
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2007 
ENGLISH B 
- 2 - 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
JUNE 2007 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
In 2007, approximately 19,363 candidates wrote the examination. This examination, the second for the revised 
syllabus, showed a significant improvement in candidates’ performance. In 2006, 44.68 per cent of the 
candidates achieved Grades I - III. This number increased significantly in 2007 with 70.26 per cent achieving 
Grades I - III. 
Generally, candidates demonstrated an acceptable familiarity with the texts, and there was evidence of an 
increased personal involvement with the material and an emotional response to the conflicts and struggles being 
discussed. 
Again this year, parts of questions that required simple recall were generally done well, but weaker candidates 
were not so competent when called on to analyse situations. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic devices 
or poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the “story”. Since this 
new syllabus is genre-based, it is important for teachers to guide students to examine dramatic and poetic 
devices and to be able to discuss their effectiveness. A large number of candidates simply omitted the part of the 
question requiring comments on dramatic or poetic devices. 
Candidates need to be reminded of the importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in the 
prose fiction section where there is no sectionalizing to prompt them. Words such as “Comment on”, “Identify”, 
“Discuss”, “Compare” require different responses, and “briefly” means just that. 
Students need to be taught to focus on the specific requirements of the question and answer each part as 
thoroughly as possible with supporting evidence from the text – not to narrate the story, and not to write 
everything they know whether relevant or not. 
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. 
Intention of Questions 
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus: 
Understanding 
Knowledge of Text and Insight 
 (i) relevance and adequacy of content 
 (ii) relevance and accuracy of examples 
Expression 
Organization of Response 
 (i) structure and development of responses 
 (ii) clear and logical argument 
- 3 - 
Quality of Language 
 (i) clarity and appropriateness of expression used 
 (ii) mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling) 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01 
This paper tests 
 (i) comprehension 
 (ii) awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
These skills require 
 (i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage 
 (ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and “props” 
 (iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 (iv) awareness of the interaction among characters 
 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus) 
 (i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; 
to make a rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living. 
 (ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections 
of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question). 
 (iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism. 
 (iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses. 
 (v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in 
the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 2. 
 (vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular 
text. 
 (vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
- 4 - 
Paper 01 
Comments on Candidates’ Performance
 
Question 1: Drama
 
Overwhelmingly, candidates demonstrated their understanding and appreciation of the immediacy of the drama, 
as they responded energetically to the episode. They recognized the need to infer the feelings of the characters 
from the stage directions as indicated by the question, and linked the evidence to the feelings of excitement, 
tension and anxiety. A major contribution of the study of literature is to enable students to name and distinguish 
emotions and feelings. Some candidates did not get beyond the cliché of ‘having the spirit of carnival’ or the 
‘carnival feeling’. Some demonstrated an inability to use evidence to support their estimate of Pa’s importance 
in the household. Conclusions that Pa was the sole breadwinner cannot be supported by ‘your father’s costume 
take every cent we had.’ Exercises to make inferences from evidence are invaluable in all genres. Thankfully, 
the vast majority of candidates were able to demonstrate mastery of this skill on this occasion. Determining the 
conflict in this scene required analysis of the evidence. Most candidates recognized the central point of conflict, 
and full marks, achieved by many, were awarded for identifying the underlying cause. Most candidates 
correctly identified excitement and tension as the best description of the atmosphere, but some did not use the 
evidence from the two main characters to justify their answer. The marks allocated to a question is a useful 
guide to the fullness of an expected answer, The purpose of Question 1 (e) was to test candidates’ appreciation 
of the extract as a scene to be viewed on stage. A candidate could have scored three marks for any three of the 
following: 
• the music; 
• the humorous drunken song at the beginning; 
• the quarrel between Ursula and Marilyn adding tension; 
• the suspense wondering whether Pa will support Marilyn against Ursula; 
• Marilyn's dancing; 
• the contrast between the merriment outside and the tension within; 
• the suspense wondering what exactly Pa’s costume is for; 
• the suspense wondering if Marilyn will get to play mas; 
• any other reasonable answer focusing on dramatic qualities (effect on watching audience) 
Many candidates had difficulty in distinguishing between the carnival excitement that happens unseen offstage 
and the anxiety that predominates onstage. Performance on the drama was considerably better than last year. 
The mean performance increased from 5.77 in 2006 to 10.59 in 2007. 
 
Question 2: Poetry
 
The responses revealed that most candidates struggled with the experience of the poem this year. While most 
candidates correctly identified the ‘arms’ as bayonet-blade, bullet heads and cartridges or their synonyms, some 
candidates did not recognize this central idea and were therefore handicapped. The speaker was suggesting that 
the boy should examine the arms and understand the damage they can cause. Many candidates strained 
reasonable interpretation when they extrapolated that the boy was forced to be a heartless mass murderer. While 
most candidates were able to identify an example of personification, they were unable to comment adequately 
on its effectiveness. While some adept abstract-thinking poetry readers indicated courage, endurance and 
maturity as the things the boy lacks, many restated what was mentioned in the poem but found difficulty in 
explaining why his lacking them was significant. The use of the language of suggestion was tested in (e) but not 
many were able to identify appropriate phrases. Candidates could have scored the full two marks for any two of 
the following:
• His teeth seem for laughing round an apple 
- 5 - 
• To stroke 
• Nuzzle in the hearts of lad - suggests cuddling 
• Fingers supple 
• Thickness of curls 
Question 3: Prose
 
The delightful prose passage posed some difficulty for candidates. Most candidates were able to earn at least 
two marks by providing evidence from what they learnt about the narrator from the first three paragraphs. 
Evidence that the narrator and her sister were from a mixed cultural heritage required mention of both American 
and Haitian roots, and the passage abounds with evidence of cultural practices, values, beliefs, celebrations and 
cuisine. The cause of the conflict between Ma and the girls was represented by a specific event, their request to 
be pall bearers, which heightened the ongoing conflict of values between the generations. Many candidates 
identified the specific incident but ignored the underlying cause. Most candidates were able to identify cases of 
Ma’s speech without the quotation marks, but the use of italics for emphasis, irony or sarcasm was not widely 
understood. Generally, candidates’ inability to earn the maximum in responding to one way in which the father 
is significant reflects the need for a greater teaching focus on strategies of close reading of prose extracts, 
demonstrating knowledge of structure, point of view, contrast of characters, episode and theme elaboration, each 
of which could be exploited in this case. 
Paper 02 
General Comments on Candidates’ Performance 
Since two of the questions on this paper are comparative analyses, it is important for candidates to be trained in 
the skills of structuring a comparative essay. Candidates need to be instructed on how to read a question 
carefully, paying attention to each section, and, where applicable, noting the proportion of marks being awarded. 
They should be encouraged to use the sections in the questions as a guide to structuring their essays, but 
should not present their response in segments—and certainly not with each segment on a separate page. 
Vocabulary building is necessary; students need not merely to be able to identify an example of a character’s 
typical behaviour or an example of mood shift, but should be able to name the character trait or mood that is 
being illustrated. Names of people and places should be correctly spelt, and problem spellings should be 
anticipated and prepared for. Correct spelling of words like throne, soldier, prophecy, heir can be taught, for 
example, when preparing candidates to answer a question on Macbeth. 
For the Poetry section, it is important for candidates not only to identify and give an example of a figure of 
speech, but also to discuss its effectiveness in that poem. 
For the Drama section, it is important for candidates not only to know in detail what takes place in any particular 
scene, but to be able to connect that scene with the entire play in terms of plot, theme, character revelation, 
mood and conflict. 
Section A - Drama 
Questions 1 - 4
Too many candidates attempted questions on both of the plays. Only one question may be selected from this 
section. Teaching should prepare candidates to discuss the relationship of a particular scene to the total effect of 
the play. Candidates need not merely to be able to recount the events or describe character; they should be able 
to comment on dramatic techniques such as contrast, irony, foreshadowing, suspense, etc., and, in modern plays, 
on the stage setting, use of lighting, music, costumes, and so on. 
- 6 - 
Candidates should be reminded that the segments in the questions are intended to guide in essay planning. Too 
many candidates ignore the instruction to write each answer in essay format. 
MACBETH 
Question 1
This question focused on the mental and moral deterioration of Macbeth during the course of the play. 
Candidates generally scored well in part (a), which asked for the circumstances and motive in four killings 
carried out or ordered by Macbeth. In part (b), where they were asked to find evidence of his mental and moral 
deterioration, some candidates were less confident, and many failed to differentiate between mental, on the one 
hand, and moral on the other. It was clear that many candidates could easily recall Macbeth’s actions, but had 
not gone to the next stage of evaluating them. The final section tended to be poorly done: candidates knew 
when they felt admiration or sympathy for the protagonist, but were quite at sea when asked to comment on the 
effect of Shakespeare’s strategy in manipulating our emotions. Time management was also a problem, and 
candidates need to be aware of the marks available for each section of the question. 
Question 2
This was the less popular of the two Macbeth questions, and it was generally handled slightly less competently 
than Question 1. This may have been because it focused on a small, more specific, portion of the play. 
Candidates were able to outline the events in the scene identified, but had difficulty naming the various moods 
created – possibly a matter of limited vocabulary rather than of insensitivity. Most candidates managed to show 
the contrast between Lady Macbeth and Lady Macduff, though weaker candidates did not understand 
“contrasted”, and tried instead to find similarities between the two women. Most candidates were able to 
connect the events in the scene to Macduff’s role as avenger in the final battle. 
THE GLASS MENAGERIE 
Question 3
This question focused on Amanda’s character and her role in the tragic events in this play. Candidates were 
mostly able to recall in detail the incident referred to in the prompt quotation. In the second section of the 
question, they were generally able to illustrate Amanda’s character traits, but not to name them. This inability 
appears to result from limited vocabulary, and, perhaps, non-familiarity with the word “traits”. The final 
section, in which candidates were required to show how Amanda’s character traits contribute to the tragedy 
within her family, was poorly done on the whole. Again, the pattern emerged that candidates were able to 
handle recall questions, but were weaker when it came to analysis. 
Question 4
This question required the candidates to discuss the psychological implications of family relationships in the 
play. Most candidates were able to give evidence of Laura’s inferiority complex. Most were less comfortable 
applying the comment to Tom – some candidates apparently being thrown off course by the fact that Tom is not 
present when the comment is made. Certainly detecting a sense of inferiority in Tom takes more insight than 
detecting the same problem in Laura, and Tom, of course, fights hard to preserve his self-esteem. Predictably, 
part (c), requiring a comment on “significance and dramatic effect”, was poorly answered. Candidates need to 
step back from the words and actions of any particular scene and ask themselves how the part contributes to the 
whole; they must be able to discuss the dramatic impact of any specific moment in the play. Terms like irony, 
climax, foreshadowing must be part of the candidate’s working vocabulary. 
- 7 - 
Section B – Poetry 
Questions 5 - 6
General comments 
There is room for improvement in the teaching of poetry. For Question 6, there were too many scripts in which 
candidates totally misinterpreted both poems. For Question 5, some candidates submitted opinions based on 
experiences extraneous to the poems. Many candidates scored their good marks on the (a) and (b) parts of the 
poetry questions, but were very weak on the (c) part, the part that tests for understanding of the genre. 
Candidates tended to be unable to name devices used in the poems, or, if they knew the name of a device, were 
unable to provide an example of that device. Others named a device and gave an example, but were unable to 
comment on how the device functioned in that particular poem. Many candidates merely quoted parts of the 
poem that were particularly striking and commented on them, but were not able to actually name the device 
being used. 
It is important that students be taught the basic vocabulary of poetry, be able to identify and NAME figures of 
speech (e.g. simile, metaphor, alliteration), be able to identify basic structural devices (repetition, rhyme) and be 
able to explain HOW in particular poems these devices work to create certain meanings and effects. 
The classroom experience of a poem should include discussion of point of view, tone, allusion, imagery, irony, 
contrast, the appropriateness of the title, and other such devices. 
Question 5
Candidates clearly enjoyed these two poems and wrote with enthusiasm. However, they need to be taught the 
skills of writing a comparative analysis. Candidates tended to deal with first one and then the other poem, with 
little attention to comparison. Some candidates misinterpreted item b) ii (Comment on the effects on the 
children), and offered a general discussion of the benefits of discipline instead of confining their observations to 
the content of the poems. The section on poetic devices proved the most challenging. 
Question 6
Generally well done. Again, the first two sections of the question, which required recall and comprehension, 
were handled far better than section c), which asked for a discussion of poetic devices. It is important for 
candidates to be able to identify devices/techniques used by the poet, and to discuss their effectiveness in the 
poem being analysed. Fewer candidates attempted this question than did Question 5, but performance in 
Question 6 was slightly better. 
Section C – Prose Fiction 
Questions 7-12
The Examining Committee learnt that not all examination centres had distributed the erratum sheet that 
accompanied this year’s examination paper (Paper 2). To deal with this problem, a decision was made to accept 
answers to any of the six questions (four on the original paper and two on the erratum sheet). 
In the comments that follow, the questions on the erratum sheet are re-numbered 11 and 12 to prevent confusion. 
- 8 - 
General comments 
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. Texts 
from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. Many 
candidates wrote on the “novels” Macbeth and The Glass Menagerie. 
Candidates must be taught to focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story. They 
should avoid trying to answer all four questions in one essay. 
The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is used 
explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring out points of 
similarity and difference. 
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalized, candidates need to be guided by teachers on how to 
structure their essays. Many candidates also need guidance on correct paragraphing. 
Candidates should be encouraged to study all four of the novels on the syllabus, and should be taught to use 
their reading time to select a question carefully. Story-telling should be avoided, proper names should be 
correctly spelt, and titles should be underlined. 
Question 7
This question allowed candidates to explore the dynamics of relationships. The better candidates understood that 
the question required them to see the positive and negative elements in ONE relationship, and they handled this 
well. Weaker candidates tended to discuss one relationship that was “joyous and fulfilling”, and a different 
relationship that was “sorrowful and burdensome”—missing the point of the question. 
Question 8
This question focused on the difficulties of growing up as experienced by a major character in both a West 
Indian and a non-West Indian novel. Some candidates ignored the instruction to focus on a major character, and 
selected a minor figure instead. The main weaknesses in responses to this question were story-telling instead of 
analysis and failure to structure the essay as a comparison. 
Question 9
There were not many superior responses for this question. Many candidates were able to identify family 
relationships but could not say how the relationship affected a major character. In fact, many candidates gave 
confusing answers and failed to focus on the question. Some candidates limited their discussion to a relationship 
of the major character with only one other family member, and this sometimes negatively affected their scores. 
Question 10
Candidates were asked to discuss ways in which a major character in each of the texts selected was affected by 
the illness or death of someone close to him/her. The more thoughtful responses focused on the psychological 
effects of dealing with sickness or death of someone close while the weaker responses confined their discussion 
to physical changes that resulted. In the latter case, essays tended to slide into story-telling instead of analysing 
the deeper consequences of coping with these difficult experiences. 
- 9 - 
Question 11
Candidates who understood what was meant by “landscape” tended to do very well on this question; they had 
evidently been well prepared. Too many candidates simply did not know what the term means, and used it 
synonymously with physical or social environment – especially those who wrote on Crick Crack Monkey. 
Many candidates wrote about the behaviour of characters rather than about changes in attitude and personality. 
Some very good responses dealt with the evident symbolism in the landscape in, for instance, Green Days by the 
River and A Separate Peace. Responses on The Pearl and Crick Crack Monkey were not generally very good. 
Question 12
This was by far the most popular prose question. The question invited candidates to consider the way a major 
character copes with a challenge during the course of the novel, but still has more problems to deal with as the 
novel draws to an end. Misinterpretations of the question abounded, with many candidates dealing with one 
challenge faced early in the novel and several more towards the end of the novel. Responses that ranged over a 
series of challenges tended to fall into story-telling. Some candidates selected characters that were inappropriate 
to the discussion: Leper, Juana, Tantie, for instance. Nevertheless, some of the better candidates came to grips 
with the requirements of the question, and discussed the fact that, even after dealing with one big challenge, 
Gene has to go on living with his guilty memories, Kino has to rebuild his life after the loss of his son, Tee has 
no sense of identity as she migrates to England, and Shell faces many difficulties as he enters married life with 
Rosalie. 
Appendix 1 shows the Analysis of the candidates’ responses. 
General 
Overall performance in 2007 showed a significant improvement over that of 2006. In Paper 01, the drama 
question was done better than either poetry or prose, which seemed to present equal difficulty to candidates. In 
Paper 02, candidates performed similarly in each of the three genres. 
- 10 - 
APPENDIX – 1 
Question # Text No of 
Responses 
Percentage of 
Candidates 
Drama 
1 11148 57.5 
2 
Macbeth
2191 11.3 
3 1455 7.5 
4 
Glass Menagerie 
4592 23.7 
Poetry 
5 11594 59.8 
6 
World of Poetry 
7624 39.3 
Prose Fiction * 
7 4424 22.8 
8 4023 20.7 
9 981 5.0 
10 1185 6.1 
11 914 4.7 
12 7788 40.2 
*Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for comparison from 
the following: 
West Indian 
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge 
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony 
Non West Indian 
A Separate Peace John Knowles 
The Pearl John Steinbeck 
C A R I B B E A N E X AM I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON THE CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2008 
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2007 Caribbean Examinations Council ®
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
- 2 -
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
JUNE 2008 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
In 2008, the final year of the first cycle of the new syllabus (2006-2008) the overall examination 
performance was slightly below that of 2007. Mark allocations were indicated for the various parts of the 
questions on drama and on poetry, and candidates were able to respond to the weighting given to each 
section. Mark allocations were not indicated for the prose questions, so in this Profile candidates were 
given greater latitude for structuring their responses. 
Candidates were generally quite familiar with the texts, and there was pleasing evidence of personal 
involvement with the material as candidates responded with enthusiasm and emotion to the conflicts and 
issues raised.
Again this year, parts of questions requiring simple recall were consistently done well, but analysis of 
situations proved difficult for weaker candidates. Sections of questions dealing with dramatic devices or 
poetic devices were markedly less well done than those that required familiarity with the ―story‖; 
however, a number of superior scripts suggest that students are well able to master these aspects of 
literary studies once they are carefully taught. It was heartening to note that most candidates can name 
various devices though they often failed to identify the device in the text. Discussion of the effectiveness 
of the device in conveying the theme of the work tended to be a challenge for all but the really good 
candidates. On the whole, candidates tended to score low marks in sections of the questions requiring 
comments on dramatic or poetic devices. 
Although questions are sectionalized, candidates need to be reminded that their responses should be in 
essay format. Far too many candidates sectionalize their responses—even putting the sections on separate 
pages in their answer booklets. There is need, too, for students to be taught techniques for producing 
flowing essays; connectives were noticeably absent, particularly where candidates were attempting 
comparisons. 
Candidates need to be reminded of the importance of answering each part of the question, particularly in 
the prose fiction section where there is no sectionalizing to prompt them. They should also be guided by 
the number of marks allotted to each section, ensuring that they provide a full response when several 
marks are available. 
It was evident that many candidates did not understand prompt words such as ―Comment on‖, ―Identify‖, 
―Explain‖, ―Discuss‖, ―Compare‖. Students need to be taught to focus on the specific requirements of the 
question and answer each part as thoroughly as possible with supporting evidence from the text—not to 
narrate the story, and not to write everything they know whether relevant or not. When the question asks 
for the candidate‘s opinion (―Which of the two poems do you find more disturbing?‖), the response must 
be supported by evidence from the text; it is not acceptable in a literature examination for the candidate 
merely to draw from personal experience. 
Teachers are reminded that students may choose only one question from each section. 
Intention of Questions
All questions are designed to test the specific skills listed on Page 25 of the syllabus:
Understanding 
- 3 -
Knowledge of Text and Insight
 (i) relevance and adequacy of content 
(ii) relevance and accuracy of examples 
Expression 
Organization of Response 
(i) structure and development of responses 
(ii) clear and logical argument 
Quality of Language 
 (i) clarity and appropriateness of expression used 
(ii) mechanics of writing (sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and spelling) 
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 01 
This paper tests 
 (i) comprehension 
(ii) awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
These skills require
 (i) analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage. 
 (ii) attention to dramatic devices such as stage directions and ―props‖
(iii) awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
(iv) awareness of the interaction among characters
Skills and Aptitudes Tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus) 
 (i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and 
plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness 
and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living. 
 (ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis 
(the ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various 
sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question). 
(iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism. 
(iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses. 
- 4 -
 (v) The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques 
in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is 
tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 2. 
(vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text. 
(vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature. 
Comments on Student Performance in Paper 1 
 
When compared with the last two years, the questions on the 2008 Paper 01 reflected a greater focus on 
understanding literary techniques and their effectiveness in the genre rather than questions testing 
understanding of concepts embedded in the extracts. 
More marks were also allocated to questions that demanded a higher level of interpretation and analysis. 
Teachers and candidates should note that this trend in the weighting of marks in Paper 01 will continue. 
Average performance in Drama (6.18) was better than Poetry (5.54) or Prose (5.03) and this surprisingly 
disappointing performance belied the engagement with the experiences in the extracts which many if not 
most candidates displayed. Candidates are clearly excited by the extracts. What they need to display now 
is disciplined thought in response to the questions. 
The first two questions on the drama allowed candidates who were most discriminating to gain maximum 
marks by providing complete details. They recognized that patrons were normally expected in the shop 
and this earned the third mark as they also mentioned the two named characters. Most candidates earned 
2 of the three marks for identifying two named characters. The same gradation occurred in response to 
(b) with the more discerning candidates who recognized and mentioned Petit Belle Lily‘s different 
interest to the love relationship thus earning the full 2 marks. 
This trend was even more marked in candidates‘ responses to (c) and (d) which tested candidates‘ 
understanding of the drama as a staged performance. In (c) candidates who included both the 
‗preparation for‘ and the ‗crowning of‘ the stick-fighting champion earned the full 2 marks. Candidates 
were able to earn marks for citing appropriate evidence which is replete in the stage directions as well as 
in the action of Briscoe and his conversation with Joe. Dramatic techniques and candidates‘ comments on 
their effectiveness were the focus of (d), and here only an exceptional few earned total marks. We cannot 
overstress that the focus of this paper is to allow students to demonstrate their appreciation and 
awareness of the literary genres and how they work. Candidates should avoid the vague generalities and 
identify specifically how, for example, Briscoe dramatizes his transformation from an inconspicuously 
dressed customer into the potential king stick fighter in his miming. 
The same pattern of focus on the literary qualities of the genre is reflected in the questions on the Poetry 
and Prose passages. Unfortunately and disappointingly, even when candidates identified similes they 
were not able to comment competently on their effectiveness. Often, they gave general or vague 
commentary on outstanding similes. A few exercises in close reading of texts and focused response to the 
writer‘s intention and effect would be excellent preparation for the required skills. In the prose passage, 
several candidates were reluctant to recognize the speaker‘s flawed perspective and this led to fatal 
misinterpretations of this 
humorous passage. Candidates and teachers are again encouraged to approach Paper 01 with a 
determination to confidently apply the skills they honed in the study of the set texts in the genres to 
unseen passages. 
General Comments on Student Performance in Paper 02 
- 5 -
Once again it was evident that candidates need to be trained in the skills of structuring a comparative 
essay. They need to be instructed on how to read a question carefully, paying attention to each section, 
and, where applicable, noting the proportion of marks being awarded. While they are expected to use the 
sections in the questions as a guide to structuring their essays, candidates should not present their 
response in segments—and certainly not with each segment on a separate page. Vocabulary building is 
necessary; students need not merely to be able to identify an example of a character‘s typical behavior or 
an example of mood shift, but should be able to name the character trait or mood that is being illustrated. 
Names of people and places should be correctly spelt, and problem spellings should be anticipated and 
prepared for. Teachers are urged to anticipate and deal with key words that may be needed by the 
student. Fascinating spellings turned up for words such as Caucasian, prejudice, Ku Klux Klan, sarcasm, 
allusion, supremacy, crucifixion, scorpion—all words that must have been used in class discussions. 
It was evident that many candidates were better prepared this year to deal with poetic devices. Three 
steps are necessary: naming the device; quoting or otherwise clearly identifying the device; and, thirdly, 
saying what effect that particular device produces in relation to the overall intention of the poem. 
For the Drama section, it is important for candidates not only to know in detail what takes place in any 
particular scene, but to be able to connect that scene with the entire play in terms of plot, theme, 
character revelation, mood, conflict, and so on. Candidates should understand the symbolic nature of 
stage props, and be able to relate those visual symbols to the themes of the play. 
New Time Limit
With the 2009-2011 syllabus, the time allowed for Paper 2 will be reduced to 2 hours. In view of this, 
teachers may need to work with students on time management so that all three questions will receive 
adequate attention.
Section A – Drama 
Questions 1 - 4
Some candidates again attempted questions on both of the plays; however, only one question may be 
selected from this section. Candidates should be aware of the sequencing of events, and should be able to 
discuss the relationship of a particular scene to the total effect of the play. It is not sufficient for 
candidates merely to recount the events or describe character; they should be able to comment on
dramatic techniques such as contrast, irony, foreshadowing, suspense, etc., and, in modern plays, on the 
stage setting, use of lighting, music, costumes, and so on. 
MACBETH
Question 1
This question focused on the conflict within Macbeth‘s mind as he contemplates the act of regicide, on 
the ways in which Shakespeare evokes our sympathy as we watch this struggle, and on the play‘s 
insistence that killing the King is a most reprehensible act. Quite a number of candidates misinterpreted 
part (a) of the question, which asked for a description of Macbeth‘s conflicting thoughts and feelings as 
he ―contemplates the murder‖ of Duncan. They read this as ―looks at the scene of the murder‖. In part 
(b), candidates were asked to write about how Shakespeare evokes sympathy for Macbeth, and in part 
(c), to explain how 
Shakespeare makes it very clear that regicide is a most horrible crime. All three sections were fairly well 
done, but candidates need to be aware of the time sequence referred to. Time markers like “In the period 
leading up to Duncan’s murder”, “during this period” and “later” were sometimes ignored by 
candidates, with unfortunate consequences. 
Question 2
- 6 -
This was the more popular of the two Macbeth questions. Many candidates referred to movie versions of 
the play rather than to the text itself. As in question 1, many candidates were not alert to time markers: 
―as she prays‖, “in the hours that follow” and “at this stage”. Those who failed to observe the time 
frame required by the question tended to ramble through the play, producing evidence randomly. Section 
(a) tended to be poorly done, chiefly because candidates responded too briefly to gain the 9 marks 
available, but sections (b) and (c) were dealt with more competently. 
THE GLASS MENAGERIE
Question 3
 
This question focused on Amanda‘s destructive parenting methods. Some candidates seemed not to have 
realized that Amanda, though perhaps well meaning, causes psychological damage to her children—
particularly to Laura. While some candidates handled the dynamics of this domestic tragedy fairly well, 
many floundered and were unable to relate to the tensions underlying the action. 
Perhaps because the very concept of ―destructive behaviour‖ was unclear to many candidates, they were 
also unable to discuss the connection between the setting/the music and the impact on her children of 
Amanda‘s conversation and behaviour.
Question 4
This question proved challenging for many candidates. While candidates were able to list Tom‘s leisure 
time activities, some were unable to move from there to comment on what we can learn about him from 
his choice of activities. Section (b), too, proved difficult, with candidates failing to adequately justify 
their claim that Tom either was, or was not, selfish. Most importantly, though, candidates were generally 
unable to properly discuss Tom‘s function in the play as narrator—and consequently as the one who most 
wins our sympathy and whose point of view influences the opinion of the audience. Nor were most 
candidates able to show that Tom‘s actions drive the plot to its climax.
Section B – Poetry
Questions 5 – 6
General Comments 
It was evident from a large number of scripts that teachers have been paying more attention to poetic 
devices, and have been showing students how to discuss their effectiveness. There were still many cases 
of candidates being able to name a device but not identify an example correctly, or, alternatively, to name 
the device and identify an example, but then to be unable to proceed to discuss the effectiveness of that 
device. In most cases, any such discussion was very brief, and this led to poor marks when up to 4 marks 
were allotted for identification and discussion of one device. 
As in previous years, many candidates, when asked for their opinion, offered material extraneous to the 
poem instead of searching the poem itself for supporting evidence.
Many candidates were unable to identify the speaker in the poem, merely identifying him as ―the 
persona‖ instead of as ―a schoolboy who experiences racial prejudice in the classroom‖ or, in the other 
example, as ―an adult who is talking to his/her son about the hypocrisy rampant in society‖. Further, few 
candidates were able to comment on the effectiveness of the choice of speaker. 
The classroom experience of a poem should include discussion of point of view, tone, allusion, imagery, 
irony, contrast, the appropriateness of the title, the effectiveness of the choice of speaker and other such 
devices. 
- 7 -
It was encouraging to note that candidates generally were very familiar with the poems they chose to 
write about, and that they had done research into the historical moment in which the poem was produced. 
Another pleasing observation is that candidates responded with strong emotions to injustices presented in 
the poems. This enthusiasm is commendable, but it needs to be channeled into disciplined discussion of 
poetic devices that evoked such strong emotions. 
Question 5
Some of the scripts responding to this question were outstanding, but generally it was not well done. 
Quite a number of candidates wrote about poems other than the two identified in the question. Generally 
candidates did well on Section (a), describing the kind of prejudice (race/class) in the poems, and were 
able to find examples of that prejudice at work. Section (b) required identification and discussion of two 
poetic devices in each poem. This section was tackled less confidently than Section (a) that required only 
recall and not analysis. It was extremely pleasing, though, to note that quite a few scripts dealt very 
sensitively with the use of allusion in the two poems—to fairy tale and folklore in the one, and to the 
Crucifixion in the other. Section (c) asked the candidate to compare the two poems, showing (with 
reasons) which was more disturbing. In a question of this sort, candidates should comment on the 
disturbing features of EACH poem and then conclude with a decision on which is MORE disturbing. 
Candidates who only dealt with one poem at this point lost a few marks. More important, though, is that 
many candidates relied too heavily on material extraneous to the poem as reasons for their choice. 
Candidates need to understand that in a literature examination, most supporting evidence for statements 
made must come from the work under consideration. 
Question 6
Candidates were generally able to identify the speaker in the poems (though some persisted in referring 
vaguely to ―the persona‖), but only the better candidates were able to say why the choice of speaker was 
effective. Section (b) was fairly well done, with candidates competently identifying aspects of society 
with which the speakers were not happy, and somewhat less competently identifying aspects of 
themselves with which the speakers were not happy. Section (c) was where most candidates did not earn
marks. Having correctly identified and illustrated a poetic device, they were most often unable to say 
very much about how that particular device contributed to the overall impact of the poem. The intense 
emotional identification of candidates with the two speakers‘ concerns (racism and hypocrisy in society) 
was very pleasing. 
- 8 -
Section C – Prose Fiction 
Questions 7 - 12
General comments
Candidates need to be reminded that they may select their texts only from the four listed in the syllabus. 
Texts from the previous syllabus may not be used, nor may plays from either this or the former syllabus. 
Many candidates wrote on the ―novels‖ Macbeth and The Glass Menagerie! 
Quite a number of candidates lost marks for writing on two West Indian novels or on two non-West 
Indian novels. The questions clearly indicate that one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel should 
be used. 
Story-telling was once again the main weakness in responses to questions in this Profile of the paper. 
Candidates should focus on the requirements of the question and not merely retell the story. Generally 
speaking, candidates managed to deal with the part of the question that required recall, but fell down on 
the part that required analysis. 
The purpose of the questions in this section is to encourage comparison—whether or not that word is 
used explicitly in the question, so students need to be taught strategies for structuring their essay to bring 
out points of similarity and difference. 
Since the questions on prose fiction are not sectionalized, candidates need to be guided by teachers on 
how to structure their essays. Many candidates also need guidance on correct paragraphing. 
Candidates should be encouraged to study all four of the novels on the syllabus so that they will have a 
greater choice among the questions in this section. Next year, when the time for the exam is reduced to 2 
hours, candidates may well need help in planning their essays in such a way that they focus on the 
requirements of the question instead of resorting to story-telling. Proper names should be correctly spelt, 
and titles of novels should be underlined. 
Generally candidates managed better with the novels Green Days by the River and The Pearl than they 
did with Crick Crack Monkey and A Separate Peace. This last novel proved particularly challenging for 
most candidates. 
Question 7
 
This question invited candidates to consider conflict experienced by a major character in each of two 
novels and to comment on one issue that the writer wants readers to understand from that conflict. While 
candidates were fairly confident while writing about the conflict, they were less sure of themselves when 
moving from that recall activity to discussing the themes of the novels they had selected. 
Question 8
For this question the candidate needed to compare and contrast the situation in which a major character is 
affected by the power of a person, group or society. Responses that used A Separate Peace were 
particularly disappointing, with candidates making little use of the fact that the boys‘ lives are so 
devastatingly affected by the war. Responses using the other three texts were fairly well done. 
- 9 -
Question 9
This question asked candidates to examine the assertion that painful experiences in life help people to 
understand themselves and others better. Most candidates were able to identify painful experiences 
undergone by a major character in each text. Showing just what had or had not been learnt from those 
experiences proved rather more difficult. Better responses managed to weave together painful experience 
and lessons learned from that experience. 
Question 10
In this question candidates were asked to choose novels in which the main character suffers loss. The 
responses here showed a serious absence of structure, with candidates listing every single ―loss‖ 
experienced by the main character instead of selecting the two or three main examples in order to 
produce a focused essay. It was encouraging to see that some candidates, writing on The Pearl, were able 
to move beyond the obvious loss of Coyotito and of the pearl itself and to explain how Kino had lost out 
in terms of his relationship with Juana and his personal morality. Candidates who opted to use Crick 
Crack Monkey and A Separate Peace tended to have difficulty identifying the ―loss‖ experienced by the 
main character, though quite a number of candidates responded very sensitively to the loss of identity 
suffered by Tee as she tries to adjust to life with Aunt Beatrice. 
General 
Overall performance in 2008 was somewhat less impressive than in 2007. Paper 2, in particular, was 
handled better than Paper 1. It was evident that candidates who had been well prepared for the poetry 
questions on Paper 2 did exceptionally well, but that there were many candidates who seemed not to have 
been prepared at all for this Profile; indeed, those candidates who attempted only two questions rather 
than three almost always omitted the poetry question. There was less story telling in the Prose section, 
but many candidates lacked the skills to read the question carefully and interpret its requirements. For the 
Drama question, 
teachers need to deal with specifically genre-related devices (stage setting, conflict, stage directions, 
etc.), but they should also alert candidates to the time frame of events in the play: instructions limiting 
the response to a specific time period were often ignored. 
- 10 -
APPENDIX – 1 
Question # Text No of
Responses
Mean mark on
question
Drama
1 Macbeth
23 Glass Menagerie
4
Poetry
5 World of Poetry
6
Prose 
Fiction
* 789
10
*Students were required to select one West Indian novel and one non-West Indian novel for 
comparison from the following: 
West Indian
Crick Crack Monkey Merle Hodge 
Green Days by the River Michael Anthony 
Non West Indian 
A Separate Peace John Knowles 
The Pearl John Steinbeck 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2009 
ENGLISH B
Copyright © 2009 Caribbean Examinations Council ® 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved 
- 2 - 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
JUNE 2009 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The CSEC examination in English B consists of two papers. 
Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions one from each mode of writing – Drama, Poetry and 
Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‟ 
assessment. In each question candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. 
Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per 
cent to the whole examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions which are arranged under three sections 
which correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer
one question from each section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type A questions, two on each text. These questions require 
knowledge and study of one text. Candidates must answer one question. 
Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison that require 
knowledge and study of two texts. Candidates must answer one question. 
Section C, Prose Fiction, consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study West 
Indian novels as well as other novels in English from the prescribed list. Candidates must answer 
one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to 
the whole examination. 
Paper 01 – Short Answer Questions 
The disappointing results of this year‟s performance in Paper 01 reveal quite clearly that most 
candidates and their teachers are still under the mistaken belief that this paper is a comprehension 
exercise. It is not. This paper requires candidates to apply the core skills they develop in studying 
the writer‟s craft through their focus on the set texts. They are to demonstrate how well they can 
apply these skills to the unseen drama extract, poem and prose extract. 
The genre-based focus of the syllabus and examination since 2006 should have signaled a major shift 
in teaching and learning of literary appreciation. Instead of a focus on the content of the texts and 
the themes explored, teaching and learning in English B should now focus on how the artist 
(dramatist, poet and prose writer) shapes his/her work to affect the minds and hearts of the readers or 
audience. Previous schools‟ reports have emphasized that the questions will remain essentially the 
same, but the unseen passages will change. The syllabus outlines that the objectives are meant to 
cover the techniques the artist uses to manipulate how the reader will most likely think and feel about 
what the artist produces. Teachers who faithfully follow the philosophy and intent of the syllabus 
- 3 - 
will produce students who are critical thinkers, who will be able to read between the lines and see 
strategies of persuasion at work and so become less gullible and less easily manipulated. 
Performance in Paper 01 indicates that greater emphasis needs to be placed on preparation for 
responding appropriately to the questions on the paper. 
The mean mark out of 15 for Drama (7.04), Poetry (4.9) and Prose Fiction (8.43) charted a slight 
improvement in Drama and Prose Fiction from last year, but performance in Poetry fell below last 
year‟s. Teachers are urged to adopt a developmental approach in preparing candidates for success in 
this examination, and especially for this paper, where what is required is the application of skills they 
are expected to have honed in the study of their set text. 
Paper 02 – Extended Essay Questions 
The 2009 examination was the first testing of the new cycle of texts in the 2009-11 syllabus. 
Following on from requests from teachers‟ associations and teachers all questions in Section C, the 
prose section, could be answered using any of the four texts. (It should be noted that this represents a 
significant difference from the 2012-14 examination, in which all questions will be text specific). 
The 2009 examination also introduced a new approach to Question 6, the second of the poetry 
questions. This was a general question that allowed candidates to choose the poems they wished to 
discuss, based on a specified rubric or theme. The aim of this question was to allow greater latitude 
for candidates to show their knowledge of a wide range of poems on the syllabus. 
Candidates seemed to have approached the examination with enthusiasm and a high level of reader 
response, often showing passionate engagement with the characters and issues discussed, especially 
in poetry and drama. Most candidates knew the texts well. However, as in former years, some used 
drama and poetry texts to answer prose questions (Section C); in Section A, some relied on film 
versions of The Merchant of Venice instead of the text; and in Section B, some displayed inadequate 
knowledge of the poems. Some candidates appeared to have been well taught and put to good use the 
socio-historical contexts of the texts, including poems. Some, however, appeared to lack this 
knowledge even where it was necessary. 
Overall, most candidates performed well on the parts of questions requiring knowledge of the texts. 
The analytical aspects of the questions, that is, those that required candidates to show knowledge of 
the writer‟s craft, allowed well-prepared candidates to display their skills and elicited some excellent 
essays. However, these aspects continued to pose a major challenge for less well prepared 
candidates. Candidates showed familiarity with the vocabulary of literature, but many were unable to 
do much more than mention the names of devices. The problem was particularly apparent in their 
response to the poetry questions. It appeared least in the responses to the prose questions, but for a 
negative reason: too many candidates seemed unaware that prose writers also use devices, and 
tended to respond to prose with reference only to events. The better prepared candidates included 
discussion of literary features and devices such as setting, contrast, irony and symbols in their 
responses. Many candidates were unaware that phrases such as „how the writer shows…‟ require 
some attention to literary devices, and that words such as „discuss‟ and „comment on‟ call for 
analysis, not narration. Even so, there was a pleasing improvement in the attempts to focus on the 
demands of the questions rather than simply narrate. 
- 4 - 
With regard to language and organization, most candidates wrote in essay format and paragraph 
organization and use of English were generally satisfactory. Many who wrote in essay format 
attempted introductions and conclusions, and there was improvement in the attempt to make 
comparisons between the texts in particular questions. Some candidates produced excellent 
introductions that utilized all the key terms in the various sections of the questions. The better 
candidates also made transitions between paragraphs, using appropriate words, sentences and phrases 
such as „however‟, „in contrast‟, „both‟, „in the same way‟ to link the thoughts from one paragraph to
the next. 
However, some problems persist. In answering the structured questions, many candidates continue to 
write in itemized sections instead of essay format. Some even wrote each part of the question on a 
different page or separated by spaces from the preceding part. In some cases, all or most of the 
candidates from particular schools wrote in this way. Many who wrote in this format produced 
confused, repetitive responses because they did not conceptualize the essay as a whole. Material used 
in answer to one section was repeated in subsequent sections, as candidates seem to have read and 
answered one segment of the question, then gone on to read and answer the next segment, as in a 
short answer response. Students need to be taught to write in essay format, regardless of whether the 
question is structured or not. Instruction should also be provided on how to organize responses to 
non-structured questions, such as those in Section C. Candidates also need to be taught to 
conceptualize the question as a whole, and to frame their introductions with both texts in mind, in the 
case of questions requiring a response to two texts. 
Students should be reminded to underline the titles of novels and plays, to place the titles of poems in 
quotation marks, and to use capital letters to begin all the words in titles, except for function words. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short-Answer Questions 
Drama
Candidates experienced few problems in dealing with comprehension-type parts of the questions 
such as Part (b) which asked candidates to identify two stage props and Part (e) where they were 
asked to identify two different feelings the extract evokes in the audience. However, where 
candidates lost marks were in the parts of the questions which required that they show how the writer 
manipulated the dramatic techniques to achieve his purpose. For example, Part (b) also asked the 
candidates to state the importance of each stage direction identified. Part (c), which asked candidates 
to state two dramatic functions of the customers and the crowd, was poorly done. Teachers need to 
focus more on the elements of the genre and how the writer uses these elements to create meaning. 
Poetry
This question was badly done as the mean indicates. Of the 19,247 candidates who answered it 279 
or 1.5 per cent scored zero and only six candidates scored full marks. Part (a), which was worth one 
mark and merely asked the candidate to identify who “they” referred to, was not well done. Part (d) 
which asked candidates to identify the mood in specified lines also was not well done. These are 
questions which required comprehension of the poem. It was obvious from the responses to these 
questions that many of the candidates did not understand the meaning created in the poem. Hence, 
the poor performance in the other parts of the questions which required analysis of different aspects 
of the poetic techniques used by the writer to create meaning. 
- 5 - 
Prose
While candidates performed better on this question than on the poetry question, performance was not 
as good as expected. Candidates were able to answer quite well Parts (a), (b) (i), and (e). However, 
Parts (b) (ii), (c) and (d) proved to be challenging to many candidates. 
Paper 02 – Extended Essay Questions 
Intention of Questions
All questions were designed to test the specific skills listed on page 23 of the syllabus. 
Drama
Questions 1 and 2: William Shakespeare‟s The Merchant of Venice
As expected, most responses (a total of 71 per cent) in the drama section were on Questions 1 and 2 
combined. However, Question 1 was by far the more popular, accounting for approximately 63
percent of total responses in the drama section. Question 2 accounted for a little over 8 per cent. 
Most candidates performed well on Question 1. 
Question 1 
The overwhelming popularity of Question 1 can be attributed to the fact that it focused on the 
courtroom scene, the dramatic final showdown in the play. The problem of being carried away by 
film versions rather than focusing on the text was particularly apparent with this question. Both 
questions elicited high levels of reader response as candidates took sides with „the underdog‟ along 
both racial/ethnic (Shylock) and gender lines (Portia) or took sides on more „universal‟ moral lines, 
arguing that Shylock was immoral to want to commit murder, or that Portia was guilty of dishonesty, 
regardless of whether or not it was for a good cause. Many candidates had been taught the historical 
contexts of the play as well as the rules of argumentation and put these to good use in framing their 
arguments. However, as many candidates argued one-sidedly, ignoring factors such as the treatment 
meted out to Shylock and Jews generally, seeing the Venetians as all good, and Shylock as all bad. 
This seemed attributable as much to poor textual analysis as to lack of knowledge of the historical 
context. For example, Antonio‟s treatment of Shylock was often ignored.
 
Candidates scored well on Part (a), which required an outline of the legal issues being addressed in 
the courtroom. 
The least well-handled part of the question was Part (b) which required candidates to explain the 
punishment and mercy that Shylock received. Many candidates had no idea how to structure their 
response to this part. Instead of pointing out which parts of their responses had to do with 
punishment and which to do with mercy, candidates often merely listed the things done to Shylock, 
with no attempt to develop the points. Part (c), which required candidates to discuss ironic aspects of 
the scene, elicited some very interesting and acute discussions, and some candidates focused on 
dramatic irony. This part proved challenging for weaker candidates as they were either not familiar 
with „irony‟ or were unable to explain it properly. Some who were familiar with the device did not 
present both sides of the situation they considered ironic. Instead of fully outlined situations of irony, 
candidates gave hints through one-sided statements. 
 
- 6 - 
Question 2 
This question addressed the issue of morality in the play. This was not as well done as Question 1. 
Some candidates either did not understand what is meant by „moral‟ or ignored it completely. Part 
(a), which required candidates to discuss two moral lessons learnt by specified characters, sometimes 
elicited unfocused plot summaries involving these characters as candidates sought to display their 
knowledge of the play rather than to respond to the question. Part (c) required candidates to discuss 
how Shakespeare showed that Portia had moral weaknesses. Candidates interpreted this to mean any 
form of „weakness.‟ Some, especially those unfamiliar with the historical context, spoke about 
Portia‟s „foolish‟ obedience to her dead father. 
Questions 3 and 4: August Wilson‟s Fences
Approximately 8 per cent of the candidates attempted Question 3 and approximately 19 per cent
attempted Question 4. Most candidates had a sound knowledge of the text and performed well on 
both questions. Candidates identified with the characters in the text and seemed to have enjoyed 
writing their responses. Better prepared candidates addressed dramatic devices and strategies used by 
the playwright as required in Parts (a) and (b) of Question 3 and Part (c) of Question 4. 
Question 3 
Question 3 required candidates to outline the final scene of the play and to show how the playwright 
heightened the audience‟s feelings of sadness and regret while suggesting feelings of compassion 
and hope among Troy‟s family members. Candidates who did not know the play well introduced 
details outside of the scene and gave vague outlines of the scene itself. 
Question 4 required candidates to discuss how Wilson presents Troy‟s performance as a parent, 
comparing his performance with his father‟s as well as with Cory‟s assessment of him. Candidates 
were able to perform well on this question as the same information used in Part (a) could be used to 
answer Parts (b) and (c) with different commentary. Weaker candidates gave repetitive or story￾telling answers as they re-presented details without commentary directed at the specific parts of the 
question. 
Poetry 
Questions 5 and 6 
Approximately two-thirds (67 per cent) of the candidates who attempted Section B answered 
Question 5. This question required candidates to respond comparatively to two poems about death: 
„To an Athlete Dying Young‟ and „The Lynching.‟ However, the fact that one-third of candidates 
attempted the general question, Question 6, indicates that while the majority of candidates preferred 
the structured question, the new format for Question 6 has significant appeal. 
- 7 - 
Candidates produced some excellent responses to both questions, and many candidates obtained 
satisfactory scores. Surprisingly and pleasingly, many candidates obtained their best scores on these 
questions. However, too many scored most of their marks on the recall and interpretation aspects. 
The most important skill being tested is the ability to show how poetic devices are used to highlight 
themes and achieve particular effects. Most candidates seemed to have been exposed to the 
discussion of poetic devices and could name devices used. However, discussion of how the devices 
actually worked, and how they were linked to the overall meaning or theme being discussed, was 
often vague, rambling and confused. Some candidates gave the names of devices but could identify 
no example of the device in the poem. Most candidates who referred to puns and oxymoron had no 
idea what these terms meant. The difference in meaning among crucially important terms such
„poet‟, „persona/speaker‟ and „character‟ were often not known. Candidates confused the speaker 
with the poet, or identified a character in the poem as the speaker. The latter problem arose 
frequently with regard to „God‟s Work‟, a popular poem in answering Question 6. Mr Edwards was 
often identified as the speaker, possibly because he spoke a line of narrative in the poem. Often 
candidates did not know the poems well, and concocted their own versions of what the poems were 
about. Many candidates did not link the discussion of devices to the rest of the question. 
Question 5 
In answering Question 5, many candidates confused Dennis Scott‟s „Epitaph‟ with „The Lynching‟, 
and far too many candidates wrote without any apparent awareness of the historical context in which 
lynching took place. As a result, many held the erroneous idea that the lynched man was a slave, and 
some wrote without reference to the racial issue involved. Some candidates who did not know the 
poem well wrote that the crowd was both black and white. The poems, like the novels and plays, are 
set texts; thus, wherever necessary, the historical context should be taught. 
Question 6 
Question 6 required candidates to compare two poems that deal with the issue of power. The 
question had the advantage of being able to be answered with reference to almost all the poems on 
the syllabus. Although the question was less well handled than Question 5, candidates produced 
some fascinating, original and creative discussions and insights into the nature of power. Popular 
choices in answering the question were „Richard Cory‟, „God‟s Work‟, „God‟s Grandeur‟, „Colonial 
Girls‟ School‟, „Sonnets from China‟, „The Emigrants‟ and „This is the Dark Time, My Love.‟ 
„Sonnets from China‟ was often misread, but pleasingly, some candidates showed knowledge of the 
sonnet form and were able to comment on the relation between its structure and the poem‟s meaning. 
The same types of problems that arose for Question 5 also arose for Question 6. Many candidates 
compared the devices instead of showing how the devices highlighted the issue of power. Many did 
not know the historical context of „This Is the Dark Time, My Love‟ and wrote that the poet was 
depicting war in Guyana. 
One recurrent problem was the use of „invented‟ quotations. Candidates should be encouraged to 
give good paraphrases if they cannot remember the exact quotations. 
- 8 - 
Prose Fiction
Question 7 
This question, which asked candidates to discuss the writers‟ presentation of ways in which the 
traditions and values upheld by society may or may not be in conflict with an individual‟s potential, 
was attempted by 19 per cent of candidates who attempted Section C. Candidates addressed the term 
„traditions‟ in pleasingly diverse ways, including „folklore‟, „customs and practices‟, and „communal 
beliefs.‟ Some candidates addressed only traditions, while others addressed only values, but overall 
the question was well done. This question again highlighted the need for candidates to be taught the 
historical context of set texts. The absence of this type of knowledge was especially apparent in the 
case of Beka Lamb. Many candidates attempting to use the political situation in Belize as part of 
their argument had difficulty as they were completely unfamiliar with the historical situation. As 
with the other prose questions, weaker, less well prepared candidates engaged in story telling instead 
of organizing their responses around comment statements related directly to the question. 
Question 8 
This was the least popular of the prose questions, eliciting under 8 per cent of the responses. The 
question required candidates to discuss how writers use the natural environment to represent 
concepts or feelings. Its lack of popularity could be attributable either to candidates not knowing 
what is meant by „natural environment‟ or to the fact that they have not been taught the symbolism of 
nature as setting. Nature as an aspect of setting plays an important part in all four novels, especially 
The Hummingbird Tree and A Kestrel for a Knave. Setting, in all its aspects (natural, social, 
geographical), is an important aspect of the study of prose fiction. Candidates should be prepared for 
questions on this feature. Overall, candidates did not do well on this question. 
Question 9 
This question required candidates to discuss how being different from others affected a major 
character in two novels, and to comment on one strategy used by each writer in presenting this 
difference. Approximately 24 per cent of the candidates who attempted the Prose Section chose this 
question. Many ignored the part of the question that required analysis of the writer‟s strategy. Some 
candidates used drama or poetry texts and so could not score any marks. 
Question 10 
This question, which asked candidates to discuss the influence of family relationships on the 
development of major characters, was by far the most popular of the prose questions. It was 
attempted by approximately 51 per cent of the candidates. The question elicited some very good
responses, but about 40 per cent of the candidates engaged in storytelling instead of directing their 
responses to the specific question. While all the texts were appropriate, candidates often did not 
choose appropriate characters for analysis, or were unable to present arguments even where the 
character was appropriate. This was particularly evident with regard to all the major female 
characters (Jaillin, Sophie, Toycie) except Beka. Candidates may have studied the texts with an 
overarching focus on protagonists, neglecting the other significant characters. 
- 9 - 
Conclusions 
Candidates seem to have become more comfortable with the genre-specific direction of the syllabus. 
More teachers appear to be teaching poetry successfully in a serious way, and more attention appears 
to be paid to the skills of language use and organization. However, more needs to be done to help 
students explain HOW devices work to achieve their effects, and to use specific, concrete language 
(sight, sound, taste, etc) when discussing images and effects. Students need to be given adequate 
exercises in identifying and explaining puns, oxymorons, irony, and distinguishing between the 
speaker‟s voice and the voice of characters in narrative poems. More attention needs to be given to 
the writers‟ craft in prose fiction, and students should be guided to discuss not only main characters 
(protagonists) but other major characters as well. Skills in organizing essays need to be strengthened. 
Students need to write introductions and conclusions that focus on the question and help to minimize 
„mere narration.‟ In writing the body of the essay, they should be trained to use opening and closing 
sentences that keep the essay focused on the question asked. 
Recommendations to Teachers 
Give students practice in answering examination-type questions that are structured and 
„unstructured.‟ Guiding students to see structured questions as a whole, will help eliminate 
repetitions. „Unstructured questions‟ also have an inbuilt structure or logic of sequence that 
students can be guided to identify for themselves. 
Teach students the historical contexts of the set texts. Lack of knowledge of this context is 
especially a problem with regard to Shakespeare, Beka Lamb and the poems highlighted in the 
previous section of the report. 
With reference to The Merchant of Venice: students should know that Jews in Europe were the 
victims of unequal laws: for example, confined to areas referred to as ghettos; forced to wear 
distinctive symbols that identified them as „other‟; disallowed from owning real estate (Shylock‟s 
property would not have included land) and in most cases permitted only one form of occupation: 
usury. They should be aware that Shylock was the 16th century equivalent of our modern day 
banker and that the Rialto, where Antonio and the other merchants also gathered, was a financial 
centre. Students should be guided to recognize that both Antonio and Shylock were merchants, 
except that one sold money and the other sold goods, both for profit. Even though external 
research material is available, students can be guided to pay attention to the evidence of the facts 
above within the play itself. 
The gender-specific ironies in the play can be brought out by reference to the fact that in 
Shakespeare‟s day women were treated as „second class‟ and would not have had professions as 
lawyers, and that on the Shakespearean stage Portia‟s role would have been played by a boy 
actor. 
Dramatic irony should be given specific attention as a form of irony associated with the genre. 
Re the poems: Provide information on the history of lynching as a phenomenon of post-slavery 
America. Explain that lynching is an illegal act (a particular form of murder), so the term could 
not have been applied to a slave master killing his own slave since slaves were considered chattel 
(legal property), not humans. 
- 10 - 
Provide information on the context to which „This is the Dark Time‟ speaks- colonial Britain‟s 
attempt to stop the independence movement in Guyana in 1953, by suspending the constitution, 
declaring a state of emergency and bringing in soldiers to maintain control. Emphasize that no 
„war‟ took place.
While students at this level should not be „bogged down‟ with excessive contextual information, 
some brief knowledge about the poets might help their class discussions –for example, they 
might find it helpful to know that Caribbean-born poet James Berry has lived in the USA and 
resides in Britain and that Olive Senior is a Caribbean poet who, like Berry, grew up in the 
colonial period; that „Dreaming Black Boy‟ and „Colonial Girls School‟ reflect experiences in 
their different locations. Students could be encouraged to do their own internet and library searches.
Guide students to understand the following concepts: speaker, poet, character and narrator. 
Encourage students to use literary vocabulary in writing essays on prose, not just on poetry or 
drama. Teach texts from several angles: characterization; setting; symbols; themes. 
Make use of good student-centred texts available on the teaching of the syllabus, such as Carlong 
English B for CXC (Text with DVD). Keith Noel, Sheila Garcia-Bisnott and Carol Hunter￾Clarke. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2010 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2010 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing —
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section A
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section B
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Section C
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
The 2010 examination was the second testing of the new cycle of texts. There was a noticeable increase in 
appreciation, application and overall results in both Papers 01 and 02.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
-3- 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
There was a dramatic improvement in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. 
The mean scores for Paper 01 for the period 2008–2010 in the table below show the improvement in performance. 
Mean Scores for the Period 2008–2010 
Paper 01 2008 2009 2010
DRAMA 6.18 7.02 11.00
POETRY 5.54 4.9 10.49
PROSE 5.03 8.43 7.47
Candidates demonstrated an excellent grasp of the principles of literary appreciation and added their personal and 
heartfelt responses to the excerpts/texts in the three genres. Even with the Prose Profile, where the mean mark 
recorded a disappointing 7.47, most candidates displayed their imaginative flair and creative interpretations, 
although these were ponderously misapplied to the comic passage which required light treatment. 
The personal involvement from candidates was evident in their responses. It is clear that teachers have taken the 
advice from previous reports and the sensitization sessions on the revised syllabus and added new life to the study 
of Literature. 
Question 1
For Question 1, Drama, most candidates earned one of the two marks for Part (a). Although they were able to 
identify the marriage as the main concern of the scene, and which gave them 1 mark, many candidates did not 
mention the tension or disagreement among the women. This question required candidates to form a total picture 
of not just the event but also the conflict of the scene.
However, for Part (b), which assessed candidates understanding of the use of stage directions, the majority of 
candidates were able to earn full marks. Candidates were able to competently demonstrate what the stage 
directions revealed about the characters feelings and provided the relevant supporting evidence to earn full marks. 
The majority of candidates earned the total score for Parts (c), (d) and (e). Part (c) required candidates to quote a 
line which showed tension in the scene and to explain the tension. Part (d) was a question on characterization 
which focused on Mama. Candidates had to support their answer with one speech and one stage direction. This 
question was mastered. 
Part (e) was another characterization question which focused on the character, Jenny. Again, candidates handled 
the question quite competently. 
-4- 
Question 2
For Question 2, Poetry, most candidates were able to earn full marks for Parts (a), (c) and (e), but only a few 
achieved the total score in (b) and (d).
Part (a) asked candidates to identify three aspects of the poem that would appeal to a Caribbean person. 
Candidates were able to competently respond to this question. In Part (c) candidates were asked to identify in 
what way stanza four was different from the first three stanzas. In previous years, candidates had experienced 
difficulty when responding to questions which assessed their ability to recognize difference or contrast. This was 
not the case with this question. For Part (e), candidates were able to identify the images of sound and were able to 
indicate what impressions of the sea were created by the images. 
However, candidates‘ responses to Parts (b) and (d) reinforce the view that figurative devices and their 
effectiveness continue to be challenging to students. Teachers need to find innovative ways of showing students 
how writers use the different figurative devices to create the effect they want in their work.
Question 3
The overall mean for Question 3 indicated that Prose Fiction was not well done. While most candidates were able 
to score full marks in several parts of Questions 1 and 2, most candidates did not score full marks on any of the 
parts of Question 3. Part (c) proved most challenging. Candidates could not effectively identify and discuss the 
comical element in the passage. Expected responses were exaggeration (the gestures and costumes); contrast as 
for instance, the big, strong woman and the seemingly small, old, frail man; the diction and pantomime. A more 
careful reading of the passage would have assisted candidates in responding to the comic elements of the passage. 
Candidates did not seem to be able to picture this woman who looked like a German warrior. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage as a whole. 
Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful 
processing of the events described. In the case of this year‘s prose passage, the vast majority of candidates were 
unable to discern the comic element that dominated the extract. It appears that candidates conceive Literature as a 
ponderous study of only deep and serious concerns. Teachers need to help students expand that notion to embrace 
the more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in Literature and life. 
While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to offer 
students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students offer to the questions. Too 
often, candidates‘ admissible responses to questions are inaccessible to those who do not share knowledge of their 
dialect. We therefore recommend that teachers give students the feedback on the Standard English translation of 
their correct responses to the questions. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful attempts to 
have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and emotional 
responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students‘ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation 
to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the 
study of Literature is meant to engender. 
-5- 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1
The Shakespeare questions yielded almost two-thirds of the total responses for the drama section. For Question 1, 
candidates demonstrated knowledge of the casket scenes. However, except for Portia‘s response to Bassanio, 
they appeared somewhat vague about Portia‘s response to the other suitors. There was also some amount of 
confusion, about the inscriptions on the caskets. Part (c), (How does Shakespeare show us that the casket scene 
with Bassanio is important to the play as a whole?) was by far the most challenging area of the question. 
Acceptable responses dealt with the dramatic effect such as the tension; the building of suspense; and the contrast 
with the other scenes portraying Morocco and Arragon, by way of its romantic element. Candidates were also 
expected to make the link to the entire plot, that is, by guessing right, Bassanio is now able to marry Portia and as 
a result gets involved in Antonio’s case. Connections could have been made to the ring plot as well. This portion 
of the question aimed to assess candidates‘ understanding of the significance of Bassanio‘s victory to the 
development of the play, thematically, structurally and dramatically. The better prepared candidates produced 
well-developed essays and while no one scored full marks (35), seven candidates were able to score 34. The 
mean for this question was 16.31. 
Question 2
There was a certain element of comfort and ease in terms of responding to the details required in Question 2. 
Candidates were able to describe the money lending scene with Antonio and Shylock, Part (a). However, Part (b) 
which asked for two techniques which make the scene exciting proved to be more challenging. Candidates 
experienced some amount of difficulty in identifying the techniques and further, to link these to how they made 
the scene exciting. By merely relating the scene, candidates generally did not spend enough time discussing or 
showing how language for instance was used (for example, irony, pun) or how argument was used, or even the 
-6- 
presentation of Shylock (his slow, methodical, and deliberate language that aggravates Antonio) and Antonio. Part 
(c), which asked candidates to comment on how the scene brings out one issue or theme in the play might have 
been better handled if candidates had demonstrated understanding of the word issue and theme. Many responses 
simply regurgitated the plot and others did not effectively link the scene to the play as a whole. Candidates who 
mentioned race, religion, prejudice, the bond, values, did not often provide enough textual evidence. 
This question performed slightly better than Question 1. Eight candidates scored full marks. The mean for the 
question was 17.70. 
Fences 
Question 3
Question 3 was fairly well done. Part (a), Troy‘s confession and Rose‘s response to it which was required was 
quite familiar to candidates. On the whole, the candidates handled this part of the question very well, although 
the tendency was to re-tell the plot. For Part (b), even though candidates were asked to discuss three ways in 
which the relationship changed, some responses strayed from the Troy/Rose relationship. The final part of the 
question was well done by most candidates who attempted this question. They often explored wider implications 
with finesse. There were some though, who summarized the plot instead of, for instance, discussing one of the 
symbolic meanings of the fence; that is, keeping family in, which underscores the issue of faithfulness. 
Two candidates scored full marks on this question. This question also had the highest mean for the section. The 
mean for this question was 18.14.
Question 4 
Candidates were able to describe the chosen relationship very well. They were not, however, so effective in 
commenting on one dramatic device used to present the relationship, Part (b). Devices that could have been used 
are as follows: the symbolism of the fence and its ironic function (of keeping in and keeping out, and the self￾destructive nature of the relationship between Troy and Rose); contrast; irony; imagery as in the garden image, 
and the game. Part (c) was handled reasonably well as candidates were able to identify and discuss issues/themes 
such as infidelity, communication and sexuality quite competently. 
No candidates scored full marks on this question. However, one candidate scored 34 and 13 scored 33. The mean 
for this question was 16.54. 
Poetry
Question 5
Candidates‘ performance on this question was fair. The named poems in Question 5 were ―A Contemplation 
Upon Flowers‖ and ―God‘s Grandeur‖. Part (a) asked candidates to explain two lessons learned by the speaker by 
looking at Nature. The better able candidates performed remarkably well on this question. However, the weaker 
candidates deviated quite a bit from the lessons learnt. There was also some amount of confusion with the poems 
specified in the question and others listed in the syllabus. Candidates made reference to poems such as, ―God‘s 
Work‖ confusing it with ―God‘s Grandeur‖, and ―Travelling Through the Dark‖ instead of ―A Contemplation 
Upon Flowers‖. In instances when it appeared that some candidates could not relate the title of the poems to 
Nature which was required for Part (b), they repeated the material used in Part (a). Some candidates missed 
opportunities to discuss the impact of words in the titles and what they evoke, such as contemplation, flowers and 
grandeur. Many failed to make the significant connection to the importance of Nature.
-7- 
Although ―God‘s Grandeur‖ does not mention Nature, it mentions God. Nature is important only because of God; 
it is God‘s glory that is manifested in Nature and renews it. It was heartening to see that some candidates argued 
along this vein. 
Candidates were expected to focus either on diction or devices to answer Part (c). The word illustrate might have 
caused some amount of uncertainty in responses. Generally, there were some verbose explanations about nature 
as a whole, omitting obvious responses such as trans for ―A Contemplation Upon Flowers‖– ―God‘s Grandeur‖ 
personification, rhyme, diction and for similes, comparison, repetition, internal rhyme Too often, responses 
identified the choice of word but without textual support or did not indicate the speaker‘s feeling. 
Eleven candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 15.83. 
Question 6
Question 6 is the general question and candidates are required to choose two suitable poems from the prescribed 
list to answer the question set. Candidates seemed to have a strong preference for this kind of question as it 
yielded almost two-thirds of the responses. The storytelling element resonated well with candidates who sensibly 
and sensitively chose appropriate poems for discussion. Popular choices were ―Coolie Mother‖, ―For my 
Mother‖, and ―Richard Cory‖. Part (a) was well handled as candidates were able to outline the storyline in 
selected poems. It must be noted that candidates were not penalized for choosing lyrical poems such as ―God‘s 
Grandeur‖ as the burden was on the explanation. For example, the response could suggest how the speaker is 
looking around him and thinking about how Nature tells its own story of how humans fail to understand the 
meaning of Nature. 
Responding to why each poet finds it important to tell that particular story, Part (b), candidates demonstrated 
some level of analysis and carved out spaces for personal inputs, but weaker candidates repeated material already 
used in Part (a), returning as it were, to storytelling. Part (c), proved to be the most challenging as candidates 
were asked to discuss one device each poet used to make the story enjoyable. Some candidates indentified 
devices but could not show how these made the poems enjoyable. In some instances, devices were merely 
explained or defined and not applied to the question.
Like Question 5, eleven candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.41. 
Prose Fiction
Question 7
This was a very popular question; approximately, one-third of the candidates attempted it. What some candidates 
missed was the fact that it was not an absolute statement. The question asked for the extent to which the 
statement was true. Superior responses tied the authors‘ technique with the thematic issue and made allowances 
for the view that friendship might not always heal. Common selections were Beka and Toysie and Billy and Kes. 
Thirty-one candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for the question was 18.68 
Question 8
Question 8 required a comparison of the authors‘ portrayal of hope. This was not a popular choice. This may 
have been because in making the comparison explicit, the question asked for more than mere discussion or 
narration. Weaker attempts focused only on hope, with little or no knowledge of tragedy. Again, candidates who 
-8- 
chose Beka Lamb and A Kestrel for a Knave had strong arguments that provided fruitful discussions either via 
characters or writer‘s craft or a combination of both. 
While this question was not popular, many of the candidates who attempted it provided some well-developed and 
superior essays. This question produced the highest mean for the entire examination, that of 19.22. Two 
candidates scored full marks. 
Question 9
This was the least popular question in this section. The question specifically focused on narrative techniques 
(signalled by ―Show how the writer presents …‖). Candidates, for the most part, resorted to storytelling of 
instances of injustice in selected texts. However, superior and good responses focused on the use of contrast as in 
race, class and gender; symbols such as the church, school, the teacher, David’s father; tone as in the satirical 
ways in which fanaticism is explored in The Chrysalids, for instance, and setting in the texts, to indicate instances 
of injustice. 
Questions 8 and 9 had direct reference to writer‘s craft and is may be why they were not popular among 
candidates. 
This mean for Question 9 was 15.00. No candidate scored full marks (35) or even 34. Four candidates achieved a 
score of 33. 
Question 10
Question 10 was one of the more popular choices; approximately one third of the candidates attempted it. The 
question focused on the difficulties faced by a major character in search of personal freedom. Narration was 
popular but stronger responses acknowledged the political context of colonialism in Beka Lamb for instance, and 
its impact on the personal. Those who selected The Hummingbird Tree discussed for instance, the stranglehold of 
class, race and gender. Responses for The Chrysalids discussed David’s struggle to be free from his tyrannical 
and fanatical father. Billy’s entrapment in his social class and dysfunctional home environment and low 
expectations from society, were common responses for those who selected A Kestrel for a Knave. 
Two candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 16.64. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice limits the 
depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer the 
question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this a genre-specific 
examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the analytical 
element in essays. 
-9- 
4. Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen vocabulary, 
grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find opportunities to give small 
writing tasks (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students such as 
 exercises which target introductory paragraphs 
 finding textual evidence to develop one point. 
5. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the movie version, for 
instance). 
6. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area.
7. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, teachers are
encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the language to describe, 
explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening and speaking. 
8. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument of the 
writers‘ style, but is also the ‗lived‘ experience. Literature can help students to explore, question, form 
judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what is 
sometimes captured in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2011
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The historic first January sitting of the English B examination exposed a diverse range of responses from a 
population of candidates that ranged from 11–59 years. Candidates‘ responses suggested that they enjoyed the 
encounter with set texts and responded with the range of organizational thinking styles which they either naturally 
developed or were schooled into.
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two components —
Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing —
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of ten optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section A
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Section B
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates must choose two 
appropriate poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer 
one question from this section. 
Section C
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English. These texts are specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
The overall performance in the January 2011 English B examination was quite satisfactory and it is envisaged that 
performance will improve even further as candidates‘ performance on Profile 2 — Poetry — improves. 
-3- 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
Candidates‘ performance in Paper 01 was good. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 29.25; 
in Profile 2, Poetry, 20.29; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 22.98. The weakest performance was in Poetry. 
Candidates demonstrated an excellent grasp of the principles of literary appreciation and added their personal and 
heartfelt responses to the excerpts/texts in the three genres. The personal involvement from candidates was 
evident in their responses which seemed to range from precocious to a mature analysis of the texts and the 
questions. 
Question 1
Overall the question was handled well and quite a few candidates earned full marks. Generally, the more able 
candidates were able to access marks which ranged from 11 to 15 (15 marks being the maximum). Those who did 
not achieve maximum score either misinterpreted the question or did not give full enough responses. Candidates 
are encouraged to read extracts in their entirety instead of focusing on one or two words to base their responses. 
Most of the candidates were able to earn one of the two marks allocated to Part (a). This question assessed 
candidates‘ comprehension of the incident taking place. There was some misinterpretation. Some candidates saw 
the event as a political rally or a protest (making reference to words like ‗minister‘ and ‗commissioner‘). Others 
chose to highlight and interpret the word ‗gay‘ as having homosexual connotations or that there was just a march, 
missing the carnival-like event. 
Part (b), which assessed candidates understanding of the use of dramatic techniques, produced some very good 
responses. However, like Part (a), there was evidence of misinterpretation. For example, Brock‘s statement about 
getting an exorcist or using bullets was taken to mean that he was not in favour of the tramping. Some candidates 
gave only one and not two ways in which the playwright showed that Brock does not share the view of the others. 
Others missed the dramatic technique of the stage device. They indicated, for example, that Brock leaves the 
stage. There were some candidates who merely quoted lines from the extract instead of using the lines to show 
the manifestation. 
Part (c) (i) required candidates to use the words ‗how undignified‘ to show what they revealed about Stickwell‘s 
attitude. This part of the question was not well done. Some candidates responded to the behaviour of Stickwell to 
the marchers instead of using Stickwell‘s words to evaluate or assess his attitude to the festivity of the marchers. 
Others tried to define the word ‗undignified‘. The better prepared candidates were awarded full marks for 
accurately indicating that Stickwell was being condescending, snobbish and was generally disgusted by the 
-4- 
actions of the Tramping Man and his supporters. The second part of this question, (c) (ii), was reasonably well 
done, although there was evidence of misinterpretation, possibly because candidates did not understand the word 
‗imply‘. The expected response for this question required candidates to capture the fact that Stickwell did not trust 
Brock and that he was not surprised by his action. There was some confusion in the assumption candidates made 
that he was making reference to the Minister, when he was actually speaking about Brock. Some candidates 
made statements like, ‗He told the Minister not to go to the dance, but he would not listen.‘ In a few instances, 
candidates felt that Brock was the same person as the minister. 
Part (d) (i) required candidates to state one difference between the government officials and the Tramping Man 
and his supporters. Generally, responses should have suggested that the government officials seemed stiff and 
unmoved by the music, whereas the Tramping Man and his supporters seemed alive and energetic. One of the 
major areas of misinterpretation for Part (d) (i) was that instead of showing the difference between the 
government officials and the Tramping Man, candidates looked at differences among the government officials and 
their positions. Part (d) (ii) required candidates to show how the playwright emphasizes the difference identified 
in Part (d) (i). Expected responses should have mentioned the dynamics between the on-stage versus off-stage 
activities (the stiff irrational abuse by officialdom versus the offstage energized, joyous, natural movement led or 
influenced by the Tramping Man). Many candidates repeated material mentioned in Part (d) (i) instead of looking 
at the importance of saying how or looking at the playwright‘s method (technique) of differentiating between both 
groups and were therefore unable to access the marks awarded for this question. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item. The onus was on the candidates to take a position then provide textual 
evidence to support the position taken. Many candidates scored full marks as they were able to support their 
claim. However, some candidates did not understand the meaning of the word ‗justified‘ and proceeded to 
contradict themselves. For example, they said the reasons for the arrest were justified yet they showed why it was 
not right for the Tramping Man to be arrested. Others restated lines to support the position taken. 
Question 2
For Question 2, Poetry, candidates seemed to identify with the issue of aging. Part (a) was fairly well done as 
most candidates understood the image being portrayed. Many candidates saw the image of the old man but few 
went further to see other things, for example, alone, quiet, hunched. 
Part (b), which assessed poetic technique, required candidates to identify the literary device and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates discussed the effectiveness of the device without identifying it and so could 
not be awarded full marks. Additionally, although the explanatory note said what Guardian was, some 
candidates creatively inferred it was a person. Effective responses identified the device as either metaphor or 
personification and suggested how the ‗drooling‘ captured the image of the newspaper slipping from Pa‘s grasp 
and the ways in which the falling newspaper and Pa‘s drooling are similar. 
Part (c) though not literary, posed some amount of difficulty for some candidates who merely connected Pa‘s 
‗silent rage‘ to his quiet surroundings or the fact that he is old. However, insightful responses made reference to 
line 5 ‗how seldom he laughed in those days‘ suggesting that Pa is angry now as he reflects that when he was 
young he did not really enjoy himself; Pa resents his own physical helplessness (evidence — his hands are no 
longer steady); ‗Pa can no longer control his thoughts‘(line 14), among others. 
Most candidates managed reasonable responses to Part (d) (i), which asked for two impressions of Pa. Some of 
the responses which were awarded full marks included: Pa was a role model; one who portrays positive attributes; 
other descriptors such as unflinching, solid, dependable, loyal, focused, and faithful. Part (d) (ii), however, posed 
a challenge for candidates who, instead of giving two words or phrases to support the impressions in (d) (i), 
-5- 
quoted entire sentences. Ideal responses mentioned ‗steady hands‘; ‗vices he declined‘ for phrases and ‗sacrifice‘, 
and ‗anchored‘ for words to support their claim. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item which proved challenging for those who said that the title was inappropriate. 
A few candidates did not commit but their responses pointed to either a positive or negative leaning. Candidates 
should be trained to take a position and to defend such a position. 
Question 3
Overall, candidates‘ responses indicated that they found the passage was manageable and interesting and within 
their experience. Part (a), which required candidates to provide two reasons why the narrator was upset was well 
done and candidates who did not earn full marks tended to ignore the instructions to confine their responses to 
paragraph one. It is important that candidates read the questions carefully to ensure that they provide the 
requirements of the question and so improve their ability to earn full marks. 
For Part (b), candidates were required to identify the literary device in a given phrase and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates did not name a device (in this case, metaphor) and others named incorrect 
devices and so did not earn the one mark for this part of the question. Additionally, some only attempted an 
explanation of the phrase and many did not know what ‗jellyfish‘ was. Those candidates who did justice to the 
question mentioned the mother‘s helpless shaking as she laughs and how the narrator feels like her mother is 
stinging her by not paying her any attention. 
Part (c), which assessed candidates‘ knowledge of irony was not well done. Many candidates did not identify the 
irony (located within the four lines given) or explain it. A complete response would have entailed the candidates 
explaining the nature of the contrast, that is, what was expected by the narrator (comfort, love, affection) versus 
what was received (being ignored by her mother) when she went home. 
Part (d) was fairly well handled. Candidates were required to indicate how the narrator felt after her mother 
confirmed she had eaten breadfruit and to support the response given. Once candidates identified the feelings, for 
example, that the narrator felt betrayed by her mother/ was distrustful of her mother/ was repulsed by her mother, 
they were able to supply the necessary evidence and were able to earn full marks. Responses which captured the 
crocodile image; the mother‘s laughter; or the mother being half in and half out the door got full marks. On the 
other hand, some candidates had difficulty providing supporting evidence. Some candidates identified the feeling 
before and not after as indicated in the question. Others did not identify the feelings but gave supporting 
quotations. 
Although Part (e) provided for reader response and allowed candidates to express their views, some were not clear 
about what they agreed or disagreed with. Quotations were cited but not enough to support a full and clear 
response to the question. Such responses did not allow candidates to earn full marks. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
1. Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for candidates to be exposed to literature. 
2. Discussing literary devices must be continued. It is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
3. Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage as a 
whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a 
thoughtful processing of the events described. 
-6- 
4. While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students offer to the 
questions. Too often, candidates‘ admissible responses to questions are inaccessible to those who do not 
share knowledge of their dialect. We therefore recommend that teachers give students the feedback on 
the Standard English translation of their correct responses to the questions. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1
Questions about the casket scenes tend to yield good responses. For this the first January sitting of the English B 
examination, five times as many candidates attempted Question 1 as against Question 2. For Part (a), which 
required candidates to describe the test set for Portia‘s suitors and the consequences of their choosing wrongly,
most candidates were able to describe the test, the types and inscriptions on the caskets. Many, however, were 
not as accurate in describing the consequences of the suitor‘s incorrect choice. 
Part (b) required some analysis of the correct selection of the caskets, that is, how the test would ensure that Portia 
married someone who truly loved her. Candidates were expected to suggest how the test was designed to sift the 
suitors by exposing those who were concerned with outward appearance, glamour and glitter as well as those who 
were arrogant and vain. This sifting would identify the one who was willing to countenance dire consequences (of 
a single life). Only the one who would be willing to look beyond the outward appearance (base lead) to inner 
qualities would be considered worthy. Although candidates mentioned Portia‘s physical attributes, many failed to 
mention the qualities of the suitors who would take such a risk. For the most part, the tendency in this part of the 
question was for candidates to gloss over the issue of outward appearance. 
-7- 
Part (c) was the most challenging to candidates. Some claimed that not enough information was given in the text 
about Shylock as a father, therefore they could not discuss him. Other candidates adopted a one-sided approach 
and did not see anything positive about Shylock. Many candidates missed the comparative element that was 
required. However, insightful responses mentioned that at heart, both fathers wanted what was best for their 
daughters (seeing that they married well) even though their methods were different. The fathers‘ attitude to wealth 
is the most obvious point of departure. Portia‘s father provides lavishly for her, whereas Shylock hoards his 
money; Portia‘s father puts her above money whereas Shylock would prefer to have Jessica dead and his jewels 
restored to him. 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and three (0.56%) of 539 candidates who 
attempted this question achieved the total score of 35. The mean for this question was 19.51. 
Question 2
Although the mercy speech is well known, this question was not a popular choice. Few candidates outlined the 
details of the speech: Shylock would be blessed if he is merciful; mercy is a mark of greatness; justice alone 
cannot lead to salvation; that if we want to be shown mercy, we must be merciful. Many candidates had difficulty 
remembering what Portia said about mercy. However, there were some insightful responses about the mercy 
shown to Shylock. Many candidates were au fait with the ‗theatrics‘ of the scene — the sharpened knife and 
Shylock‘s thirst for blood. 
The irony of the ‗merciful‘ Christians was not lost to the insightful candidates, but the details of Part (b) were 
lacking to a large extent. Gratiano‘s behaviour (his taunting of Shylock by telling him that soon he will not have 
enough money to buy cord to hang himself) and Shylock‘s reminder that these Christians were themselves 
slaveholders who treated their slaves like asses and dogs simply because they owned them, were some examples. 
Part (c), which required that candidates comment on the mercy shown to Shylock, proved to be challenging to 
many candidates. This part of the question assessed the writer‘s technique and required analytical strength from 
the candidates. If Part (b) were handled well, as in identifying the irony and inconsistencies of the Christians, 
candidates should have moved logically to Part (c). Weaker candidates merely repeated information used to 
respond to Part (b). Ideally, the use of dramatic irony and an interrogation of ‗mercy‘ (which is bitter-sweet) 
would have been sufficient for Part (c). This part of the question is essentially reader response and candidates 
must be confident in expressing their informed judgment. 
While none of the 99 (12%) candidates who attempted this question scored full marks, one candidate scored 34. 
The mean for this question was 12.61. 
Fences 
Question 3
Almost an equal distribution of candidates attempted the questions set on Fences. The text is widely known, and 
for Question 3, so were the ways in which Troy wronged his family. Although candidates were quite competent in 
discussing the ways in which he wronged Rose and Cory, some candidates were not able to discuss the ways in 
which Troy wronged Gabriel. Expected responses for the ways in which Cory wronged Gabriel included how he 
used Gabriel‘s disability money to fix his home; how he forced Gabriel to live with Miss Pearl and how he signed 
the committal papers to get some of his money. 
For Part (b), candidates were required to show how forgiveness and hope are presented dramatically in the final 
scene of the play. Most candidates demonstrated awareness of forgiveness and hope, but too many could not 
discuss how this was dramatically presented. Among the expected responses were: what Raynell represents (as 
-8- 
the new generation); Raynell‘s garden and the attendant symbolism; Raynell and Cory singing the blues; the 
presence of all whom Troy offended at the funeral; Gabriel‘s dance, among many others. 
Approximately 99 (11%) candidates attempted this question. The highest score achieved in this question was 32. 
The mean for this question was 17.86. 
Question 4 
Part (a) required candidates to discuss how Rose nurtured Troy, Cory and Raynell. Candidates‘ responses 
revealed that they were knowledgeable about Rose, and the ways in which she nurtured Troy, Cory and Raynell. 
Part (b) of the question was not handled as well. Candidates were required to show how Rose was both hurt and 
blessed in her relationship with Troy. Candidates‘ treatment of the subject was one-sided. Many were able to 
show how Rose was hurt, but were not able to do a similar treatment on how she was blessed. Candidates could 
have presented her as being ‗blessed‘ in the following ways: Troy gave her a roof over her head; he brought home 
his salary; seemed to have been faithful for a while; and was affectionate to her. 
Candidates, who adopt a dualistic interpretation of characters and situations as good or bad, black or white, 
generally see less subtlety and complexity than their open-minded peers. 
Poetry 
Question 5
Slightly over one-third of the candidates attempted Question 5 as against Question 6. Part (a) required candidates 
to describe two poems in which Nature and technology are in conflict. While candidates were able to describe the 
details in some degree, there was not enough about the conflict between Nature and technology. A few candidates 
were more accurate in their description by pointing to the contrast. Merely mentioning the deer on the winding 
road in ―Travelling through the Dark‖ or the presence of the Spaniards in the natives‘ territory in ―From the 
Emigrants‖, did not point sufficiently to the conflict between Nature and technology. This portion of the question 
demanded knowledge of the texts and it would appear that this pre-selection was not advantageous to candidates 
as many seemed to be more conversant with ―Travelling through the Dark‖ than ―From the Emigrants.‖
Part (b), which required candidates to identify a poetic device in each poem used to comment on the impact of 
Nature and technology and comment on the effectiveness proved to be challenging to the candidates. Even when 
devices were correctly identified, candidates failed to link them to the question (in this case the impact of 
technology on Nature) or comment on their effectiveness. 
Part (c) was for the most part, reader response. However, the ‗message‘ each poet is presenting through the 
portrayal of Nature and technology should be grounded in textual evidence. The deer in ―Travelling through the 
Dark‖ is supposed to be in its habitat and it is man‘s incursion that puts both deer and people in danger. The fate 
of the fawn is at the mercy or whim of man. Painful decisions are necessary for survival. Columbus‘ sojourn to 
the West Indies in ―From the Emigrants‖ had disastrous consequences. His encounter with the natives was an 
unequal one. Pitted against the bullets, spears and sea power, the natives did not stand a chance. Technology 
might win. 
This question was not well done. The highest mark earned was 28 and the mean mark was 9.33. Two hundred and 
forty-four candidates attempted this question. 
-9- 
Question 6
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name and discuss the theme of death. Part (a) asked 
candidates for a description of the situation that caused the speaker to think about death and Part (b), the reaction 
of each speaker to the encounter with death. For Part (b), many candidates confused the speaker and the poet. Part 
(b) was an opportunity for comparison of speakers, for instance, in terms of how the encounter with death is 
treated. All poems on the syllabus could have been used, although some clearly provided more ‗mileage‘ than 
others. Part (c) was as usual the most challenging as most candidates were not able to discuss the effectiveness of 
the poetic device even when correctly identified. The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in the 
discussion, there was the tendency to divorce the effectiveness of the device from the theme of death, indicated in 
the stem of the question. 
Three of the 542 candidates who attempted Question 6 earned 33 of the 35 marks. While this question did better 
than Question 5 with a mean of 14.71, a better performance in the Poetry Profile is desired. 
Prose Fiction
The comparative questions on West Indian and non-West Indian novels offer candidates the opportunity to 
explore themes, concepts and narrative techniques which can often allow them to see levels of meaning and 
understanding while they are discussing the question. The outstanding candidates demonstrate these flashes of 
insight as they approach the question from unique angles, interpreting power, or dreams and aspirations, or 
friendship in less obvious, but perceptive ways and using the comparison, whether stated or implied, to call 
attention to fresh ways of understanding. Competent scripts generally take the safe, literal, concrete interpretation 
of the question and the text and often merely demonstrate an accurate and appropriate reading of the storyline. 
Candidates will find greater enjoyment and fascination with the novels if they are encouraged to see the 
connotative and symbolic implications of the texts, a character like Beka or David or Billy or Alan as symbolic of 
a group or age or nation. That leap in understanding could make the most concrete, basic reader of a text offer 
exceptionally creative interpretations to these questions. There were several examples in this cohort where these 
gems were revealed. 
On the other hand, inappropriate use of texts resulted in reduction of marks. Some candidates were not conversant 
with the current texts or with the details necessary to answer the questions. In some instances, they lost marks 
(many times 50% of the content) because they used drama texts such as The Merchant of Venice or Fences to 
answer questions which are clearly genre-specific. Some candidates used popular fiction such as Harry Potter. In 
other instances, texts not on the prescribed list for Prose Fiction, such as A Cow Called Boy or old CSEC texts 
such as Green Days by the River and To Kill a Mockingbird were used. It was not unusual to find instances where 
candidates used their creativity to write their own life stories to answer the questions. In the latter case, no marks 
were awarded for that effort. 
Far too often the comparative nature was missing from the discussion. Many candidates merely narrated the texts, 
disregarding the question. 
Question 7
Approximately 212 (26%) of the candidates attempted this question. Candidates were required to discuss how a 
major character in one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel is oppressed by the power of another person 
or institution and struggles against oppression in a bid for freedom. Most candidates demonstrated knowledge of 
the characters who wielded power, but those who were powerless proved somewhat troublesome. Additionally, 
the second part of the question which focused on the struggles in the bid for freedom was often left undone. 
Candidates must ensure that they respond to all the areas of the task in order to access the marks. 
-10- 
While no candidate earned full marks for this question, one candidate scored 34. The mean mark for this question 
was 17.42. This was the highest mean in the section. 
Question 8
Question 8 was the most popular question for Prose Fiction. Approximately, 365 (45%) of the candidates 
attempted this question. Candidates were required to select a major character in a West Indian and and non-West 
Indian text who dreams of a better life and discuss the struggles that character goes through in attempting to make 
those dreams come through. Whereas candidates were proficient in articulating the dream of the major characters, 
they were not so sure-footed about the struggles. Similar to Question 7, candidates must ensure that they can 
competently address all aspects of the question before selecting it. 
While no candidate earned full marks for this question, one candidate scored 33. The mean mark for this question 
was 14.99, approximately, the same as Question 7. 
Question 9
Approximately 135 (17%) of the candidates attempted this question. Candidates were required to discuss the 
extent to which the statement ‗A good friend is better than money‘ applies to a major character in one West Indian 
and one non-West Indian novel. This question clearly demonstrated that candidates are quite knowledgeable of 
the content of the texts. They, however, displayed very little knowledge in critical analysis of the text and the 
question. 
Admirably, two candidates were able to earn the highest score of 35. The mean for this question was 15.16. 
Question 10
This was the least popular question in this section. It was attempted by approximately 95 (11%) of the candidates. 
The focus of this question was explicitly the writers‘ craft and many shied away from it. Some candidates who 
attempted it were able to make connections to the titles and texts; many simply narrated the stories or 
reconstructed the lives of the major characters. The writers‘ craft was not addressed and in many instances 
misunderstood. 
One candidate earned the highest mark of 35. The mean for this question was 10.25. It was the lowest mean for 
the section. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, Questions 5 
and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 7–10 (Prose Fiction). 
2. Candidates need to know that 2011 is the final year of the cycle for the May/June examinations and 
January 2012, for the January examinations. Knowledge of the revised syllabus is necessary. Candidates 
need to select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus to study for the May/June 2012 Examination 
for English B. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2011 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2011 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) examination in English B consists of two components — 
Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — 
Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates’ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short 
answers. Fifteen marks are allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent 
to the examination.
Paper 02 consists of 10 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which correspond to the 
modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from each section.
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two questions are 
set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section.
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to study 20 
poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are 
specified by the examiner. However, for the other question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of four Type B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non￾West Indian novels in English specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination.
The 2011 examination was the final May/June sitting of this cycle of texts. The January 2012 English B 
examination will see the completion of this cycle. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, imagery, 
rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function effectively in the 
passage.
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive
 Awareness of the interaction among characters
-3- 
There was a slight decline in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. 
The mean scores for Paper 01 for the period 2009–2011 in the table below show the trends in performance.
Mean Scores for the Period 2009–2011 
Paper 01 2009 2010 2011
DRAMA 7.02 11.00 10.22
POETRY 4.9 10.49 8.32
PROSE FICTION 8.43 7.47 8.09
It is noted that while performance declined when compared with that of 2010, performance was still better than 
that of 2009 for Drama and Poetry and consistent for Prose Fiction. 
Question 1: Drama
Nine hundred and fifty-five (4.90 per cent) of the candidates scored full marks on this question. This question 
tested knowledge of the difference between mere comprehension of the extract and awareness of genre and craft 
in the shaping of the extract. Teachers may consider the impact when, in preparation for the examination, students 
are not encouraged to master the art of answering questions in full sentences to ensure that they can get to the 
heart of the answer easier and to ensure that all parts of the question are addressed. 
Most candidates were able to score the full marks for Part (a), which indicates, happily, that teachers are paying 
closer attention to the structural elements of the genre. Responses to Parts (b), (d) and (e) indicate that some 
candidates are experiencing difficulty in drawing reasonable and supportable inferences from onstage events and 
character actions and motives. This central skill in literary study should be emphasized by teachers. A few 
candidates in their responses to Part (b) interpreted ‘relationship’ as marital, ignoring the literary use of the term. 
Some candidates erroneously felt that they had to use words from the text to describe Harold’s tone. One 
disappointing aspect of the response to Part(c) which focused on how Erma builds up suspense was that less than 
one third of the candidates provided an explanation; many candidates merely offered a summary of Erma’s 
actions. The candidates who offered an explanation were oftentimes able to score full marks. 
More than one third of the candidates earned full marks for Part (e) which required them to suggest a title for the 
extract. Candidates displayed their creative imagination in the wide and varied offering of titles and their 
rationales, based on a sensitive reading and response to the events in the extract. 
The mean score was 10.32 out of 15. 
Question 2: Poetry
Thirty-six (0.18 per cent) candidates scored full marks on this question. Most candidates earned full marks for 
Part (a), as they were able to identify the two signs, from the specified lines, which showed that someone had 
died. Most candidates were able to identify one image from the lines specified to answer Part (b), but had 
problems commenting on the effectiveness, as only approximately 25 per cent of the candidates gained full marks 
for this part of the question. For Part (c) (i), some candidates instead of making the connection with a minister of 
religion, inappropriately associated the ‘minister’ with a politician. Other candidates ignored the clues of the 
minister as presented in the poem and superimposed their expectations of his role as ‘provider of comfort,’ which, 
unfortunately, was not evident in the poem. 
-4- 
Candidates provided the evidence of something ‘horrible taking place’ for Part (c) (ii), but did not explain the 
horror. Approximately 25 per cent of the candidates gained full marks for this question. Responses to Part (d) 
indicate that teachers are prioritizing poetry as an oral medium, meant to be spoken and heard. Unfortunately, 
candidates had problems spelling words like ‘rhyme’ and ‘rhythm’. 
Many candidates misinterpreted Part (e) as they sought to explain the lines specified in the question, rather than 
identifying and commenting on the speaker’s feeling in those lines. Less than a third of the candidates earned full 
marks for Part (e), and few captured the cynicism, disbelief or irony that emerge from a sensitive reading of the 
poem, without the interference of the cultural experience of the reader. 
Teachers should guide students to focus attention on the poem itself, notwithstanding the need to draw on 
personal experience to frame an introduction to the experience of the poem. Ultimately, the poem itself may offer 
a different experience than what is expected, and students should be encouraged to confront that reality. 
Examiners suggest that teachers will continue to improve their students’ competence in poetry appreciation by:
• Allowing students to hear and recite poems and respond orally to what makes them appreciate the poem. 
• Teaching students how devices are used in poetry, beyond their ability to identify the devices. 
• Expanding students’ vocabulary of feeling words — for tone, mood and characters’ emotions which are 
inferred.
• Helping students to gauge the extent of content required for an answer by the marks allocated. 
The mean score was 8.32 out of 15. 
Question 3: Prose Fiction
Two hundred and eight (1.07 per cent) candidates scored full marks on this question. Most candidates were able 
to identify the mood for Part (a), but less than half of them indicated how the writer created the mood. 
Approximately the same number of candidates was able to earn full marks in Part (b) which required them to 
explain how the sentence, I had not expected to see him introduced a shift in the mood of the passage. Most 
candidates were able to identify the dialect as the feature which suggested that the passage was set in the 
Caribbean as required for Part (c), but for Part (d), candidates found it increasingly difficult to earn the four marks 
for explaining two ways in which the writer builds tension. Approximately 15 per cent of the candidates earned 
the maximum mark for Part (d). For Part (e), approximately 50 per cent of the candidates were able to earn one 
mark for a reason the narrator’s response to Mr Johnson was different from that of his friend. Responses to Part 
(e) (ii) demonstrated that only one-third of the candidates were able to capture and explain how Mr Johnson’s 
behaviour made the passage humorous because of his careful entanglement of the boys in their own tale. 
It is instructive that Question 1, Part (c), Question 2, Part (c) ii and Question 3, Part (d), which all test candidates’ 
ability to explain the writer’s technique, demonstrate a similar distribution or spread of marks. Teachers who are 
able to have students master the concept of the author deliberately manipulating the language and form of the 
genre to influence the feelings and thoughts of the reader or audience can be assured of excellent results. If 
teachers take this approach to the study of the set texts, candidates of the examination will have been prepared for 
the demands of Paper 01 where they can display their application of these competencies. 
The mean score was 8.09 out of 15.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the passage or poem as 
a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a 
thoughtful processing of the events described. Teachers need to help students expand that notion to embrace the 
more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in literature and life.
While in this paper no marks are formally awarded for the use of language, teachers/instructors are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions, to the dialect responses that students offer to the questions. 
-5- 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful attempts to 
have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and emotional 
responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation 
to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions, is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the 
study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 23 of the syllabus): 
(i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to make 
rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other concepts explained 
in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
(ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the ability to 
bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a text for the 
purpose of answering a particular question) 
(iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical responses in 
oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism
(iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses
(v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the shaping 
of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the 
examination and most particularly in Paper 02
(vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text
(vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice
Question 1
The Shakespeare questions yielded 65 per cent of the total responses for the drama section. Most candidates 
demonstrated good knowledge of the text but some could not apply this knowledge to the question. For Part (a), 
candidates were asked to describe the love relationship of one pair of three pairs given. The most popular choice 
was Portia and Bassanio. Some candidates did not describe the relationship but gave summaries of the encounters 
between these couples. A few candidates ignored the instruction and discussed all three couples. Part (b) required 
a discussion of the obstacles encountered by the lovers in this relationship but candidates tended to identify the 
obstacles only and not show how these affected the relationship. Candidates did better in discussing the suspense
and disguise in Part (c). Here is a brief excerpt of a response that addresses Part (c), dealing with the element of 
disguise: 
The element of disguise is employed by Shakespeare to help overcome an obstacle but is also conveyed as an 
obstacle. Even Jessica’s conversion to Christianity can be seen as a ‘disguise’. She must hide her true identity for 
the sake of love. Although Lorenzo’s love is boundless, she must alter some characteristics for their relationship. 
This shows that true love always has some form of difficulty. 
There were a few candidates who confused irony and dramatic irony. 
Twenty-one candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 16.07 out of 35. 
-6- 
Question 2
This was the least popular drama question as only 290 candidates attempted it (1.48 per cent). This question 
focused on the minor characters Solanio and Salarino and their role in the play. Candidates readily accounted for 
the events in this scene and enjoyed relating its comic elements, as was required for Part (a), but Part (b) which 
asked for a discussion of the dramatic effect of this scene was not adequately handled. Expected responses 
included the humour created by the boys trailing Shylock; prophetic irony in Solanio’s remark that Antonio might 
suffer if he fails to keep his bond; the tension and suspense generated by their vivid descriptions/recounting and
how these characters functioned as the play’s ‘newspaper’ in dispensing the gossip. Part (c) required a connection 
of this scene to the play as a whole and suggested responses included the ways in which Solanio and Salarino
contributed to the economy of the drama since they reported on offstage events; their newspaper role (giving 
news on the Rialto); their support for Antonio and how they advanced the theme of money, a crucial theme in this 
play. 
One observation worth mentioning is that a few candidates confused the named scene with Act 3, Scene 1, in 
which Shylock appears onstage and questions Solanio and Salarino. This scene comes shortly after the one 
indicated in the question. 
No candidate scored full marks on this question. The mean for the question was 13.19 out of 35. 
Fences
Question 3
Twice as many candidates did Question 3 than Question 4. Writer’s craft is important in appreciating Wilson’s
(the playwright) expectations of the audience through the ways in which the feelings and thoughts about Troy are 
portrayed. Although candidates relished discussing Troy, many of them confused the thoughts with the feelings in 
Part (a) of the question. It was heartening though to see that candidates were aware that this head/heart dilemma 
could yield answers that were for, against or just ambivalent. Popular responses about the audience’s feelings
about Troy showed how he was presented at the beginning of the play as likeable, witty, engaging, romantic, and 
how Bono saw him as a leader (for the positive slant) and how he was presented as selfish/self-centred, as in his 
infidelity and treatment of Cory and Gabriel (for the negative slant). An ambivalent position saw Troy’s portrayal 
as one that evoked both sympathy and contempt from the audience. Responses about the audience’s thoughts 
about Troy would demonstrate how information about him is sequenced in the play (the good things first); how 
the audience learns about his difficult past; and having learned all of this, how do we now judge him? Part (b), 
being reader-response (giving their final opinion of Troy, with justification), yielded very good responses. Here is 
an example:
Troy is very unjust in his decision with not allowing Cory to go to college and live out his dream of playing 
football. Troy, however, uses his past failures to prevent his own son’s dream from happening. This was seen as 
selfish as he built a fence around Cory to keep society out and in the end it actually locked Cory out of his home. 
Troy is hardworking and is not pleased that he could not complete purchasing his house if it was not for money 
that was given to his brother Gabriel who was injured in the war. I don’t however blame Troy to some extent 
because he had a rough childhood. He was not given the emotional love as a child so he finds it hard to give this 
type of love to his son. His being locked up for fifteen years also shows how black men were unjustly treated and 
this has helped to drive an arrow of bitterness in Troy’s heart. 
Four candidates (0.09 per cent) scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.40 out of 
35. 
-7- 
Question 4 
Part (a) required knowledge of the pasts of Troy, Bono and Lyons. Candidates were very familiar with Troy’s past 
but had difficulty finding textual evidence for Bono and Lyons. Consequently, many of them lapsed into 
narration. Part (b) required discussion on one of these characters and demonstration of how Wilson shows the 
effect of the past on this character throughout the play. Some candidates discussed all three characters. Part (c), 
which asked for the issues about black men that Wilson was highlighting, caused much uncertainty as candidates 
seemed to have problems with the word/concept issues. However, some candidates offered acceptable responses 
such as their roles in the family (as in husband/wife relationship, parent/child relationship); role in the
community; how they perceive manliness, their attitude to and involvement in sports, and their attitude to racism. 
Four candidates (0.18 per cent) scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 18.97 out of 
35, the highest mean for the drama section. 
Poetry
Question 5
This question dealt with the portrayal of death in the poems “Traveling Through the Dark” and “Epitaph”. Part 
(a) asked candidates to describe what happens in each poem. Although most candidates were able to describe the 
events, in many instances key details were omitted, and, in some instances, candidates ‘invented’ details to fill the 
textual gap (as in the speaker hitting the deer or the white folks cheering the hanging body). On the whole, 
candidates were more comfortable with “Traveling Through the Dark” than “Epitaph” and it was quite common 
to have candidates confusing another poem on the syllabus, “The Lynching” with “Epitaph.” 
Part (b) required a discussion of the speaker’s attitude in each poem. Some candidates were cognizant of the 
complexity of the speaker’s attitude in “Traveling Through the Dark” as he is sensitive to the unborn fawn but 
practical in terms of adopting a philosophical attitude about death as he remains unswerving in his journey (which 
could also be a fitting metaphor for the road of life). The speaker’s attitude in “Epitaph” allows for more than one 
reading and insightful candidates argued either for one of anger or that of detachment. 
For Part (c), candidates were expected to identify and discuss one poetic device that each poet uses to capture the 
reader’s attention or create an emotional response in the reader. Many candidates identified a device but failed to 
provide textual evidence to support the submission. It was common to have devices selected at random that could 
not be connected to the poems. Some candidates were unable to show how the device evoked a particular 
response. Generally, it proved quite challenging for some candidates to discuss the devices and link this 
discussion to reader-response. This example infuses the device and the effect:
The poetic device of personification is used greatly to create an emotional response in the reader. The poet gives 
nature human qualities to gain sympathy from the reader and also to create suspense. When the reader sees the 
phrase, “nature listened”, we are made to feel the importance of the decision and the weight that must have been 
upon the persona. That the “car aimed its headlights” shows that technology, represented by the car, was ready 
to move on and move ahead.
Two candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 14.80 out of 35. 
-8- 
Question 6
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose two suitable poems from the prescribed list 
to answer the question set. Candidates seemed to have a strong preference for this kind of question as it yielded 
67 per cent of the responses. Model answers named two appropriate poems and described who/what is admired 
for Part (a). Popular choices were “Richard Cory”, “Coolie Mother” and “For My Mother (May I Inherit Half Her 
Strength)”. Part (b) asked for an identification and discussion of a poetic device in each poem showing this 
admiration. Discussion of the device was not a strong point for average candidates. The reader-response aspect of 
the question, Part (c), required candidates to supply textual support for a position as to which presentation of 
admiration is more appealing of the two poems. Some candidates merely repeated lines from the chosen poem to 
validate their claim. 
For this response, an encouraging number of candidates dealt well with Part (b) which asked them to show how 
the poet used a technique to present admiration. Many candidates were able to identify appropriate devices and 
explain how they were used by the poet to convey a sense of admiration. References to repetition in Goodison’s 
“For My Mother (May I Inherit Half Her Strength)” and McDonald’s “God’s Work” and personification in King’s 
“A Contemplation Upon Flowers” were well handled by candidates. Average candidates were only able to 
identify the devices and provide a limited explanation of the connection between the devices identified and the 
poet’s message. Weaker candidates for the most part only referred to the device without illustrating its relevance 
to a clearer understanding of admiration.
 Many candidates were able to give qualified justification regarding why they found one poem more appealing in 
its presentation of admiration than the other as required for Part (c). It was a delight to see many candidates 
drawing on their own experiences, and those issues in their society, such as strong mothers who sacrifice much 
for their children, to bolster their arguments for why an issue resonates with them. Weaker responses to this 
section were from candidates who appeared to lack the skills of argument and did not know the poems well. 
Twenty-three candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 17.57 out of 35. 
Prose Fiction
Question 7
This question on empathy gave candidate the opportunity to be objective and to evaluate through analysis, the 
phrase to what extent. The word encourage also suggests the ability of the writer to persuade the reader through 
his/her narrative technique. This question also asked the reader to personalize the experience of the major 
character in the texts chosen. Overall, some level of synthesis was expected in order for candidates to do well. 
Only 24 per cent of the candidates attempted this question and many ignored to what extent and gave very general 
submissions which did not fully integrate the content, writer’s style or their own personal responses. Many 
candidates did not concentrate on major characters and far too many used ‘sympathy’ and ‘empathy’
interchangeably. 
Teachers need to concentrate a bit more on teaching point of view. 
Ten candidates scored full marks for this question. The mean for the question was 16.15 out of 35. 
-9- 
Question 8
This question asked candidates to identify from each text, a major character and to show how the exposure to love 
changed him/her or impacted him/her positively or negatively. Many candidates had challenges in saying how
love changed the character. There was a heavy concentration on romantic love as against other types, for 
example, parental love and love between friends. Those who chose A Kestrel for a Knave spoke mainly about 
Billy and the hawk and very few about Billy and Mr Farthing. Some candidates had problems navigating the 
race/class dimension of the relationships in The Hummingbird Tree. Although traditionally love is a popular 
choice, only 23 per cent of the candidates attempted this question. 
No candidate scored full marks. The mean for this question was 16.10 out of 35. 
Question 9
This question, which focused on the roles of mothers, proved to be the most popular question in the prose section, 
with almost 37 per cent of the candidates attempting it. Appropriate coverage of this question would have 
included the mothers’ actions and influence, and how this influence shapes the characters and events. How the 
mothers’ role contributes to any theme/issue in the texts and how the writers’ technique help to show the mothers’ 
role would also constitute part of the discussion. Far too many responses merely listed the litany of woes about 
Billy’s mother, for example, or in other instances, discussed the behaviour of the women in the texts. 
The responses to this question were also affected by candidates’ poor choice of characters in the texts as some 
characters were never developed enough for students to write much about their roles. Another concern is the 
perennial one of candidates not mindful that they are comparing and contrasting. While it is expected that 
candidates will focus on the issues in the question for each text above anything else, it is also good practice for 
them to demonstrate an awareness of how the novelists treat similar issues and to use the language that indicates 
this awareness. The very good responses not only showed a grasp of both issues of the mothers’ role and their 
influence on others but drew attention to the similarities or differences in the treatment of such issues. 
Teachers are being asked to pay attention to having students adduce support for points they make as far too many 
of them make points without giving adequate support from the text. Good responses for this question clearly 
identified the issues, supported them well from the text, argued coherently and demonstrated an awareness of the 
comparative nature of the question. Weaker responses, for the most part, narrated without paying much attention 
to the skills demanded. 
Five candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.86 out of 35. 
Question 10
This was the least popular question, with only approximately 15 per cent of the candidates attempting it. To 
examine enclosed spaces is to see whether the characters are freed or shackled in the process. Many candidates
did not consider the longing for freedom on the part of the entrapped. Flexible interpretations of entrapment went 
beyond the literal. Average responses were limited to physical spaces but there were superior responses that saw 
entrapment from a metaphorical perspective and explored the psychological, social and racial spaces. 
Seven candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 20.05 out of 35, 
the highest for the prose section. 
-10- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
 Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice limits 
the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments.
 Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres, for example, using a Drama text to answer the 
question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this a genre-specific 
examination.
 The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays.
 Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen vocabulary, 
grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find opportunities to give 
small writing tasks (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students such as 
 exercises which target introductory paragraphs
 finding textual evidence to develop one point. 
 Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the movie version, 
for instance).
 Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area.
 While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and/or reading the poems, for instance, teachers
are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the language to 
describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening 
and speaking.
 Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument of 
the writers’ style, but is also ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to explore, question, form 
judgements and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what 
is sometimes captured in superior scripts.
 Candidates need to be reminded that 2011 was the final cycle of the May/June examinations and January 
2012, for the January (re-sit) examinations. Knowledge of the new syllabus (and by extension the new 
cycle) is necessary, especially in relation to text selection. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2012
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of 
three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These 
modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each 
question, candidates are required to give approximately three to five short answers. Fifteen marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 45 marks. Paper 01 contributes 30 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of ten optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from each section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type-A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. 
Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this 
section. Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type-B questions. These are questions of comparison. 
Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, 
Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, 
Question 6, candidates must choose two appropriate poems from those they have studied to answer the 
question set. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. Section C, Prose Fiction, 
consists of four Type-B questions. Candidates are required to study two West Indian and two non-West 
Indian novels in English. These texts are specified in the syllabus. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 70 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given 
effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function 
effectively in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
Candidates‘ performance on Paper 01 was below that of 2011. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 
1, Drama, was 8.95; in Profile 2, Poetry, 8.97; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 7.34. The weakest 
performance was in Prose Fiction. 
-3- 
Question 1 
The more able candidates (47.6%) were able to access marks which ranged from 10 to 15 (15 marks being 
the maximum). The extract seemed to have resonated with candidates and many were able to appreciate 
the humour. 
Most of the candidates were able to earn the full marks allocated to Part (a). This question asked 
candidates to identify the ―important day‖ in the extract. Part (b), comprising two parts, probed Celsus‘s 
view of himself as being ―ca-coa‖. Whereas candidates could identify two other images such as being a 
dead man or being tied up, many of them could not explain what these images suggest about Celsus‘s
condition. Acceptable responses included the feeling of hopelessness; the feeling of having no future; the 
feeling of unhappiness (going to a funeral) and the feeling of having his freedom taken away. Some 
candidates merely repeated the idea that Celsus feels he was bewitched. 
Part (c) asked for textual support for the two different attitudes to marriage presented in the extract. 
Candidates rightly understood that the comparison lay between Celsus and Mr Jack but many could not 
name the attitude, for example, pride, on Mr Jack‘s part (his early marriage and defense of his wife‘s 
good name) and Celsus‘s fear and even resentment since he thinks that his wedding day is more in 
keeping with going to a funeral. 
Candidates were spot on in identifying one comic incident in Part d (i) but they were not as sure-footed on 
the dramatic functions of Helen‘s exit and entrance in Part (d) (ii). Many candidates could not move 
beyond the literal. Very few saw that Helen‘s exit (to get the drink) was a means of clearing the stage to 
allow Celsus and Mr Jack to become the focus of attention (taking centre stage). When she enters with the 
drink, the men are fighting so Helen‘s presence could be that she is the one to break up the fight and ease
the tension onstage. 
Part (e) was a reader-response item (suggesting a title and justifying the selection). The onus was on 
candidates to take a position then provide textual evidence to support the position taken. Many candidates 
scored full marks as they were able to support their claim. However, some candidates moved outside of 
the text. Candidates need to remember that reader-response items are always text-based. 
Question 2 
Candidates performed best on Question 2, Poetry, with more candidates earning full marks, as against 
Drama and Prose Fiction. For Part (a), candidates were able to identify two activities in the first stanza, as 
they were attuned to the crab-catching event and the reactions of the speaker and his sister Ruby. 
Part (b) asked candidates to state one difference between stanza 1 and 2 using evidence from the text. 
Some candidates confused stanzas with line numbering. Acceptable responses indicated the differences in 
time (past and present, as in Ma was alive in the first stanza but dead in the second stanza); the 
geographical location is also different (the savannah versus America and England); and the difference in 
mood (light-hearted innocence and fun as against the dislocation, decay and fear). 
Part (c) assessed poetic technique and required candidates to identify one literary device and comment on 
its effectiveness. Although candidates were provided the prompts (the lines as well as phrases for 
discussion were listed) many of them ignored the instruction and discussed all three devices, instead of 
choosing one. Many candidates were unable to name the device in ―squelching through mud‖ and even 
though some of the responses captured the sound of bare feet treading through the mud, many did not 
mention onomatopoeia. Many candidates identified the personification in ―Death long catch Ma‖ but were 
short on commenting on the personification of death. Responses discussing the inevitability of death and 
-4- 
the passage of time were acceptable. Another personification was seen in ―the house boarded up/breeding 
wasps‖. Although many candidates pointed to the decay and disuse, better responses discussed the 
absence of warmth/human presence and the fact that destructive insects have now inhabited the house. 
Candidates had a fair sense of the feelings of the speaker (he is afraid to return home; his feelings of 
guilt; and his reluctance to face the past) and Part (d) asked candidates to suggest two such feelings. 
Part (e) (i), which asked candidates to comment on the poet‘s use of the crab image, was the most 
challenging task. Responses were vague. It would appear that the word image was not easily understood. 
Acceptable responses could have included any of the following: the crab as a source of food; 
representing communal living; the mother is compared to a crab; and the idea of doubleness 
(mating/family) and singleness (absence of family). 
Part (e) (ii) was a reader-response item which only proved challenging for those who did not have 
‗strong‘ justification for providing another title for the poem. 
Question 3 
Candidates‘ responses to both sections of Part (a) demonstrated that they understood why Aunt Lissy 
slapped the boy and that they could identify an expression that showed the intensity of the slap. Most 
candidates could select a suitable image to present the relationship between Aunt Lissy and the 
pickaninnies such as herd of pickaninnies or a stork among the chicks scurrying behind Aunt Lissy in Part 
(b) but could neither determine the relationship nor comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses 
that commented on the effectiveness of the image of ―herd of pickaninnies‖ captured the idea of Aunt 
Lissy as leader who will whip the other animals into submission, and ―herd‖ reinforcing the animal 
imagery. The image of ―a stork‖ is effective as the maturing boy is seen as a maturing stork to be 
separated from the other chicks which are dependent on Aunt Lissy. Also captured here is the bird image 
through the movement of the children (scurrying) and the contrast in height and demeanour of the boy 
and the other children. Other candidates described the relationship but failed to identify the image. Some 
candidates looked at the relationship between Aunt Lissy and the boy and ignored the other children. 
Part (c) required candidates to give two impressions of the boy which are created and textual support for 
these impressions. Some candidates lost marks because they did not treat the question in its entirety. 
Some candidates mentioned the impressions but did not provide textual support while others cited 
lines/phrases from the passage but did not provide the impressions. The following are acceptable 
responses: the boy is defiant or determined because he thought of the word [Damballah] in his mind/ he 
refused to cry; the boy is independent because he thought of a time when he will be rid of Aunt Lissy when 
he is no longer under her control or his thinking of a time when he will be doing manly things. 
While most candidates were able to identify what was ―heathen talk‖ in Part (d) and were able to 
comment on Aunt Lissy‘s value system to some extent, they missed the point that she rejected her own 
roots, and was embracing instead only what was American in a bid to wipe out all references to her past. 
For Part (e), candidates were required to identify the literary device in a given phrase and comment on the 
effectiveness of it. Some candidates identified the device (in this case, metaphor) but were unable to 
assess its effectiveness. Others commented on the effectiveness but did not name the device. The 
metaphor in this instance compares the confusion caused by Aunt Lissy’s instructions, warnings and 
admonitions to the cacophonous cackle of chickens. This reinforces the imagery of the hen with the 
brood of chickens. The animal imagery reinforces the fact that he does not see Aunt Lissy’s protectiveness 
as welcoming (seeing her cackle as noise in his head). 
-5- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of style. It 
is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. Some devices such as onomatopoeia 
proved problematic to many candidates. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at 
meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the performance element of the genre. 
 Teachers could assist students to dramatize sections of plays in class, for example, dramatize 
scenes and to summarize scenes to encourage recall. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to 
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
-6- 
Drama – The Merchant of Venice 
Question 1 
Part (a) required candidates to describe what happens in Act V, Scene I in which Portia and Nerissa 
quarrel with their husbands about the missing rings. Most candidates focused on the ring episode only, 
with no mention of others who were not directly involved in the couples‘ quarrel. Other details in this 
scene include the romantic moonlight setting with Lorenzo and Jessica, who were left in charge of 
Portia‘s house and Lancelot‘s announcement of Portia‘s pending arrival. Some candidates concentrated 
only on what happened after the wives‘ confrontation. Generally, it would appear that since this is a 
‗minor‘ scene, candidates were not sufficiently familiar with it. 
For Part (b), candidates did a fairly good job of identifying a theme emanating from this scene). 
However, some of them could not sustain the discussion to treat this theme in light of this scene. However 
insightful candidates discussed themes such as love, friendship/loyalty, money, appearance versus reality, 
power, the role of women, fidelity, and commitment. 
Part (c) asked for a discussion of two techniques Shakespeare used to entertain the audience. Appropriate 
responses would include dramatic irony (as in disguise in the courtroom scene and the ring episodes); 
pun (Gratianio’s threat to mar the young clerk’s ‘pen’); suspense (casket and courtroom scenes). 
Candidates need to be more sensitive to dramatic techniques as distinctive features of this genre. 
The total score of 35 was not achieved by any candidate. However, one candidate scored 33. The mean 
for this question was 10.42. 
Question 2 
Candidates were asked to describe the events in Act III Scene IV, when Portia tells Nerissa, ―We‘ll see 
our husbands before they think of us,‖ for Part (a). Apart from mentioning that Portia tells Nerrissa that 
they would be disguised as men and travel to Venice to meet their husbands, candidates were very short 
on details in this section of the question. Very few of them mentioned the role Lorenzo plays in this 
scene, impressing on Portia how fine a gentleman Antonio was; that he was left in charge of Belmont
while Portia takes her journey and the plans Portia sets in motion by sending her servant to her cousin 
Bellario, seeking his notes and garments. 
Part (b) required discussion of how disguise is used in one scene or instance in the play. Most candidates 
relished in the courtroom scene for the discussion of disguise. A few candidates mentioned how Jessica 
disguised herself as a boy and escaped her father’s house to marry Lorenzo. 
Commenting on the dramatic significance of disguise, (Part c), proved to be challenging to some 
candidates, who merely repeated information from Part (b). This section was open to the play as a whole, 
giving candidates full scope for discussion. Responses could have included: dramatic irony in that the 
wives (and the audience of course) know their husbands during the courtroom scene but they did not; 
Portia uses her disguise to save her husband’s friend’s life; disguise (men’s clothing) as a symbol of 
power; the advancement of the plot and development of themes; humour and entertainment. 
The following recommendations will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean texts (and 
drama as a whole): 
-7- 
 Find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even the minor scenes). 
 Dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations and discussion of scenes/excerpts. 
 Use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic techniques work. 
 Prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic techniques. 
Like Question 1, no candidate achieved the total score but one scored 33. The mean for this question was 
13.80. 
Fences 
Question 3 
Almost twice as many candidates attempted the questions set on The Merchant of Venice as against
Fences. For Question 3, Parts (a) and (b) required knowledge of what led to the specific events of Act II 
Scene IV, when Cory retorts, ―You ain‘t never give me nothing!‖ Candidates did not handle this question 
well. Events leading up to his outburst include Troy’s refusal to sign the permission papers for Cory 
which would have enabled him to be recruited to play college football; Troy’s poor parenting skills and 
lack of fatherly affection, even though he provides for his son materially; Cory’s deepening disrespect for 
Troy when he had Gabriel committed; when he had the affair with Alberta and was physically abusive to 
Ruth. 
Knowledge of the scene was important in answering Part (b) in terms of what the audience learns, such as 
the following: Rose is continuing to care for Raynell even though she is estranged from Troy; Troy is 
promoted at work and is driving but appears to be lonely as he is not so close to Bono anymore; Cory is 
hurt by his father’s unfaithfulness and exploitation of Gabriel. 
The greatest challenge was noted in Part (c) which dealt with dramatic significance. Candidates seemed to 
simply resort to telling what happened in the cited scene instead of focusing on how this scene impacts 
the play as a whole. The dramatic significance of this scene can be noted in these ways: Troy is at his 
worst here, in terms of all his relationships and this scene anticipates the hopefulness at the end of the 
play and the ways in which he will be redeemed; the culmination of the tension between father and son; 
the high energy in this scene is a fitting contrast to other quieter, humorous or even romantic scenes; 
ironically Troy is advancing at his workplace but things could not be worse at home; Cory being evicted 
is contrasted to earlier scenes when he is happily off to playing football or in the later scene, when he 
returns, smart and self-assured in his military uniform. 
The mean for this question was 11.74. The highest mark obtained for this question was 30. 
Question 4 
Parts (a) and (b) were not as problematic as the final part of Question 4. Part (a) required candidates to 
show what Rose wants Cory to understand by her statement, ―Your daddy wanted you to be everything he 
wasn‘t…‖ Candidates were expected to mention some of the many instances when Troy‘s behaviour and 
action suggested that he wanted his son to be more successful than he. Troy wanted better for Cory and 
that was why he bullied him so much; he did not want Cory to be affected as he did by racism so he 
discouraged him from football and encouraged him to further his education; he wanted Cory to be strong, 
independent and honest. 
-8- 
In seeking to respond to how Rose influences the audience‘s feelings about Troy in the end, Part (b) dealt 
with Rose‘s ability to affect the reaction of the audience in responding to Troy. Her reception of the 
family and Bono into the home gives the image of a reunited family. Rose’s response to Cory’s initial 
refusal to attend Troy’s funeral (her view that it was unthinkable that a boy could disrespect his daddy in 
this way) shows the audience that with all his faults, Troy is to be honoured and respected. Even though 
Troy had hurt people, Rose is in support of his memory and the audience believes her when she notes that 
even though Troy wasn’t always right, his intentions were good. 
Like Question 3, the highest score for this question, obtained by one candidate, was 30. The mean for this 
question was 9.08. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
Slightly under 50 per cent of the candidates attempted Question 5 as against Question 6. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the situation which caused the speaker‘s dream not to be fulfilled in ―The 
Carpenter‘s Complaint‖ and ―Dreaming Black Boy‖. For the most part, candidates were able to describe 
the situation in both poems although some responses were vague in that the former poem, the speaker‘s 
anger at being deprived of the chance of making his friend‘s casket and the latter, the racist society in 
which the speaker lived, were glossed over. 
Part (b) was reader response in that candidates were to use textual references to discuss which speaker in 
the two poems was more appealing. Candidates tended to find the boy in ―Dreaming Black Boy‖ more 
appealing (arguing that the adult carpenter in the other poem faced a different and less damaging kind of 
discrimination) but could not, in some instances, justify their position. 
Part (c) proved to be challenging and here candidates were asked to identify and comment on one poetic 
device used to explore the idea of unfulfilled dreams. For ―The Carpenter‘s Complaint‖, the most 
common submission was the simile stand up straight as a plumb-line but there are others that could be 
mentioned and discussed. The use of repetition (repeated use of the ―I‖; ―big-belly‖, ―big-shot‖, ―it hot 
me‖, ―it burn me‖) reinforces and enhances the simmering anger and resentment which boils over into 
rage. Contrast also is used to allow the reader to appreciate the passion of the carpenter, as insights are 
gained about his dead friend and the extent of the snub (depriving him of participating in the final ritual). 
Therefore, the living and the dead; the burning anger of the speaker against the recollected memory of his 
friend‘s cool demeanour (―walk/Home cool, cool, cool‖) and the one-voiced ranting of the carpenter 
versus the ‗silence‘ of his audience in the rum bar are other examples of contrast. Irony is also used in this 
poem when the carpenter mentions ―Mr Belnavis.‖ Clearly, the speaker is ridiculing this more socially 
acceptable gentleman. 
Repetition (especially of ―I wish‖) is also used in ―Dreaming Black Boy‖ and candidates made references 
to this. This refrain highlighted the speaker‘s alienation and isolation, dreams and fears. And this wishing 
deepens the pathos. Contrast could be mentioned in that the poem presents a series of contrasts between 
the boy‘s dreams and the reality of his situation. This serves to heighten the intense pain and anxiety of a 
boy whose dreams will never be realized in this racist society. Allusions are also used in this poem and 
apart from Paul Robeson, all other allusions are negative — the ―powers‖, ―hotel keepers‖, ―torch 
throwers‖ and ―plotters.‖ These negative allusions provide a contrast to the boy‘s dreams and reinforce 
the level of bigotry in the society. 
The mean for this question was 8.80. The highest score achieved for this question, by one candidate, was 
34. 
-9- 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name and discuss the theme of conflict. Part 
(a) asked candidates for an explanation of the conflict and Part (b), the reaction of each speaker to the 
conflict. All poems on the syllabus could have been used, but it was evident that some candidates were 
unprepared in their selection. Part (c) was, as usual, the most challenging as most candidates were not 
able to discuss the effectiveness of the poetic device even when correctly identified. The tendency was to 
explain and not analyse. Further, in some instances only one device was identified. If this is to be 
acceptable, the candidates must show its effectiveness (textually) in both poems. Sometimes there was 
the tendency to divorce the effectiveness of the device from the portrayal of conflict. 
This question was the only question where the total score was achieved. The mean for this question was 
12.11. 
Prose Fiction
The comparative questions on West Indian and non-West Indian novels offer candidates the opportunity 
to explore themes, concepts and narrative techniques which can often allow them to see levels of meaning 
and understanding while they are discussing the question. 
On the other hand, inappropriate use of texts resulted in reduction of marks. Some candidates were not 
conversant with the current texts or with the details necessary to answer the questions. In some instances, 
they lost marks (many times 50 per cent of the content) because they used drama texts such as The 
Merchant of Venice or Fences to answer questions which were clearly genre specific. It was not unusual 
to find instances where candidates used their creativity to write their own life stories to answer the 
questions. In the latter case, no marks were awarded for that effort. 
Far too often the comparative nature was missing from the discussion. Many candidates merely narrated 
the texts, disregarding the question. 
Question 7 
Candidates were required to discuss the extent to which the statement the desire for freedom is universal 
is applicable to a major character in one West Indian and one non-West Indian novel. Generally, 
candidates demonstrated a clear understanding of the question. However, candidates tended to write 
generally on the idea of freedom, making historical references without textual support, in some instances. 
The highest score obtained was 28. The mean for this question was 11.63. 
 Question 8 
This was the most popular question for Prose Fiction. Approximately, 50 per cent of the candidates 
attempted this question. Candidates were required to select a major character in a West Indian and non￾West Indian text who experiences challenges. For each novel, candidates had to discuss the challenges 
faced by the character. Candidates displayed their ability to identify and elaborate on a range of 
challenges from the characters‘ experiences and showed their engagement with the texts they selected. 
Some of them even selected texts which were on previous and upcoming cycles. 
The highest score obtained was 34. The mean for this question was 14.35. 
-10- 
Question 9 
This was the least popular prose question as less than 80 candidates attempted it. Candidates were asked 
to discuss how the writers help readers to sympathize with a child or young adult in one West Indian and 
one non-West Indian novel. They, however, displayed very little knowledge in critical analysis of the 
texts and the question. Many responses yielded inappropriate texts (the use of poems and plays) and this 
affected candidates‘ overall marks. 
The mean for this question was 13.37. The highest score obtained was 34. 
Question 10 
This question focused on prompting candidates to appreciate the writers‘ craft and many shied away from 
it. Some candidates who attempted it did not go much beyond discussions on the women generally and a 
few ventured to discuss the role of women in the texts. 
 
The mean for this question is 6.14. The highest score obtained was 26. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02,
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 7–10 (Prose Fiction). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the discrete nature 
of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for candidates to sharpen their 
essay-writing skills.
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of texts, 
for example, using websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Attention must be paid to all parts of questions. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
 An unusually large proportion of candidates did not attempt all three questions required in Paper 
02, largely because they were caught in the difference between the cycles of the syllabus. They 
were prepared for the June 2012 paper, but were entered for the January 2012 examination, the 
last of its cycle. This accounts for the significant decline in performance in this cycle‘s results. 
Teachers are strongly advised to note the difference in focus especially in the Prose section, the 
changes in the Drama texts and the alterations in the selected poems. The change in set texts will 
seriously handicap candidates who are not prepared. 
-11- 
 Candidates need to know that June 2012 is the beginning of the new cycle. Knowledge of the 
revised syllabus is necessary. For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative 
questions will be those set on the Short Stories. All other prose questions will be on single 
texts. Candidates need to select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus to study for 
the May/June 2012 examination for English B. 
 C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2012 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2012 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one from each 
mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles 
which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each question, candidates are required to give 
approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for each question for a total of 60 
marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from each section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of 
the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second 
question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which they have studied to 
answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to
choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
The 2012 examination was the beginning of the new cycle of texts. There was also a change in the ratio 
of the weighting of the Papers and the addition of the short story in Paper 02. Additionally, the question 
type in the Prose Fiction section was changed from Type B to Type A. Generally, performance this year 
using the revised syllabus was quite satisfactory and it is envisaged that performance will improve in the 
next sitting.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how effectively these 
elements function in the passage. 
-3- 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
There was a decline in the performance of candidates on this paper this year. This is the first year in 
which each question was worth a maximum of 20 instead of the usual 15 marks. 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 
2010–2012: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for the Period 2010–2012 
Paper 01 2010 2011 2012
DRAMA 73.33% 68.13% 60.30%
POETRY 69.93% 55.46% 53.70%
PROSE 49.80% 53.93% 50.60%
Candidate‘s performance on Drama continues to be better than performance on the other genres. Efforts 
to improve performance in the other two genres must be undertaken in the various countries which 
register candidates for the subject. 
Question 1: Drama
Overall, 132 (0.68%) of the 19,502 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) (i) of the question tested candidates‘ ability to identify setting and Part (a) (ii) tested on-stage 
characters as opposed to characters off stage. These were very basic questions on the genre; however, 
some candidates mistakenly identified the setting as a lunchroom or some kind of eating establishment, 
instead of the police station. Students must be taught that setting could also include time (as in midday or 
lunch time). For the second part of the question, most candidates were able to identify the characters on 
stage (as against the off-stage Mrs Stevenson). 
Most candidates were able to score full marks for Part (b), which asked for two details of the impending 
murder. Part (c) posed a challenge to candidates in terms of explaining the dramatic effect of Duffy‘s 
casual manner and Mrs Stevenson‘s anxiety. Instead of focusing on the dramatic effects created, many 
candidates discussed the behaviour of the characters without saying what effect it had on the characters. 
Acceptable responses included the heightened tension created in the urgency to respond to Mrs 
Stevenson’s report; the contrast also evoked humour, in that Duffy’s action did not match the seriousness 
of the situation which Mrs Stevenson was reporting; the contrast also underscored the two characters—
Duffy’s calm and measured tone against Mrs Stevenson’s agitated and flustered speech. Full marks were 
awarded to candidates who moved from mere explanation of contrast to commenting on the effect on the 
audience. 
For Part (d) candidates were required to say how the stage directions contributed to characterization OR 
plot OR mood. This was fairly well done by some of the candidates. Some, however, merely defined 
stage directions and did not use the excerpt to answer the question. Acceptable responses included, for 
example, the instance when Duffy ‘double-takes’ when he heard that Mrs Stevenson wanted to report a 
murder (this showed his professionalism and care because he thought it was a ‘real’ murder); the 
audience experienced a brief moment of anxiety, then relief at the ironic interplay between Duffy and 
Mrs Stevenson. 
-4- 
Part (e)(i), which required candidates to identify one instance when Mrs Stevenson‘s tone of voice 
changed and the second part, a reason for this, did not pose too much of a challenge for candidates. Most 
of them cued in to the stage directions ‗trying to impress him‘; ‗relieved‘ and ‗impatiently‘ and supplied 
reasonable text-based responses to support their claims. 
Responses to Part (f), which required candidates to state what Mrs Stevenson was beginning to realize in 
lines 41–43, proved that they were able to deduce correctly, as many scored full marks for this part. Most 
candidates indicated that Mrs Stevenson is realizing that the details of the planned murder are closely 
connected to the details of her situation and therefore she may be in danger.
Candidates displayed creativity and imagination in their responses to Part (g), which required them to 
suggest a title for the scene and to justify their choices. Their suggestions were varied and their 
justifications based on a careful and sensitive reading of the extract. 
Two thousand eight hundred and eighty-five (14.75%) of the 19,502 candidates who attempted this 
question earned marks between 15–20. Only 132 (0.68%) earned the full mark of 20. The total mean for 
this question was 12.06 out of 20. This was the highest mean achieved of the three genres tested. 
Question 2 
Seventy-six (0.39 %) of the 19,495 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. For this 
question the more challenging parts for the candidates, based on their responses, were Parts (c) and (f).
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in indicating that the aim of the poet was to describe/celebrate 
the birth and achievement of Pele, the great Brazilian footballer and were able to earn the full 2 marks. 
Part (b) required candidates to comment on the effectiveness of line 3. Many candidates were able to see 
the dramatic impact of the ‗scoring‘, through the magnifying of the one word, and the overall joyous 
reaction to the victory and so earn full marks. It was disappointing to note, however, that some 
candidates did not attempt this part of the question. 
Part (c) required candidates to explain what was suggested in lines 4–5. Acceptable responses 
acknowledged the pun (sun/son) and captured the role this boy would play in his mother‘s life and the 
world at large. Many candidates focussed on the ‗sun‘ and not the ‗son‘. 
Part (d) required candidates to identify and comment on the figurative device in line 10 of the poem. For 
the most part, candidates identified the simile in Part (d) but the commentary was lacking. An acceptable 
response was the simile is effective in that it captures the fluid and graceful movement of Pele and this 
image reinforces his skill. This weakness in candidates‘ responses in addressing the effectiveness of the 
poet‘s use of a device is highlighted in most of the subject reports. Efforts to address this weakness in the 
classroom must be undertaken. 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to explain the image in lines 4–11. Here we see the image of nature 
(sun, moon, stars) and the celestial elements playing a part in honing his talent in preparing him for 
greatness. Candidates‘ responses indicated that they understood the image, the challenge was in 
expressing their ideas. 
Instead of comparing the first and last three lines in the poem, as was required for Part (f), many 
candidates explained the lines and paid little attention to similarities and differences. Acceptable 
responses included the scoring (the physical birth and the celebratory scoring); both are seen as heavenly 
accomplishments and earth shattering events; one suggests a loud deafening reaction and the other 
suggests stunned silence. 
-5- 
Most candidates did exceptionally well on Part (g), both in providing another title for the poem and using 
text-based evidence to justify their choice. 
Two thousand two hundred and forty (11.49%) of the 19,495 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 15–20. Seventy-six (0.39%) earned the full mark of 20. The mean for this question 
was 10.74 out of 20. 
Question 3 
The means for Question 3 in the table above indicate that Prose Fiction posed the most difficulty to 
candidates over the three-year period. 
While candidates were able to score full marks in several parts of Questions 1 and 2, most candidates did 
not score full marks on many of the parts of Question 3. Part (d) proved most challenging. Candidates 
had difficulty understanding the word ‗effect‘ and some ended up paraphrasing the two phrases they
selected from the three provided. Acceptable responses for ‗the river moved swiftly…‘ included the 
reinforcement of danger; ‗clothes fanning out…‘ included the sense of freedom, though short-lived, of 
floating/the look of the clothes buoyed by water; ‗shot to the surface‘, the sudden ejection/the power of 
the release. 
Candidates responded well to Part (a), which required them to identify where the incident was taking 
place and support their answer with evidence. Candidates also responded fairly well to Parts (b) and (c). 
However, these parts of the question accounted for only six (30%) of the marks. 
Of note is that some candidates stopped at Part (e) and did not turn the page (even though the instruction 
was there in capital letters) to view the remaining Parts (f) and (g) and consequently lost seven marks. 
This was an error as most of the candidates‘ responses to the question up to this point showed that they 
were doing reasonably well. This is indicative of poor test-taking strategies and teachers are reminded
that they should incorporate such strategies into their teaching of the subject. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the stimulus 
material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning 
based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. Teachers need to help students expand that 
notion to embrace the more immediately pleasurable elements of the comic in Literature and life.
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers/instructors are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect responses that students 
offer to the questions. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations 
and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students‘ autonomous thought, 
bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the 
critical and creative thinking that the study of Literature is meant to engender. 
-6- 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness 
and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer‘s crafts (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour. This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Questions 1 and 2, which are set on the Shakespeare text A Midsummer Night’s Dream, yielded almost 
one-half of the total responses for the drama section. Question 1 was far more popular than Question 2. 
Almost four times as many candidates attempted Question 1as against Question 2. 
This question sought to elicit from candidates, facts about any two sets of minor characters (from the 
three sets given); it further required them to identify and show dramatic situation(s) in which the two 
selected sets come together and finally, discuss the dramatic function of one set of the characters they 
described in Part (a). Answers from candidates showed extremely diverse interpretations, with the 
identification and discussion of the dramatic situation being the most challenging. This particular portion 
of the question encouraged a certain amount of latitude and candidates‘ responses embraced the approach 
of either looking at one situation which featured both sets of characters or two separate situations in 
which each pair is featured. 
Acceptable responses to Part (c) mentioned, for the characters Theseus and Hippolyta, how the court of 
Theseus and Hippolyta provided the setting for the conflict; how Theseus introduced the theme of love; 
that the pair introduced the motif of sleep and the symbol of the moon; that they represented sobriety and 
order; and that their union provided a contrast to the younger/immature couples. A discussion of the 
dramatic function of the fairies could include the idea that they represent the magical, the dreamlike; their 
intervention in the love affairs of some of the characters advance the plot; they create comedy. The 
actors/clowns provide humour through their handling of classic tragedies and their own dramatic 
production. 
-7- 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and 138 (1.2%) of the 7,059 candidates 
who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. Nine (0.13%) of these candidates earned full 
marks (35). The mean for this question was 17.55. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to describe two ways in which the elements of dream were 
used in the play; Part (b) to discuss the appropriateness of the title of the play; and finally, Part (c), to 
discuss the dramatic functions of dreams in the play. Part (a) tested the candidates‘ knowledge, 
understanding, interpretation and analysis of the concept of dreams in the play. Candidates were expected 
to link the relevance of the title to the play itself. While it was clear that some candidates knew the play 
and interpreted the question well, several had scant knowledge of the text. For those candidates, Part (a) 
lent itself to much narration and Parts (b) and (c) were handled superficially. Acceptable responses to Part 
(c), the most challenging part of the question, included that dreams are the medium by which characters 
are made to perform actions which contribute to the action of the play; dreams are linked to enchantment 
and they propel the action (Puck enchants Lysander and the events that follow); dreams become the 
explanation for strange happenings. 
Fifty-seven (3.06 %) of the 1,865 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Sixteen (0.86%) of these candidates earned full marks. It was noted, however, that more candidates 
scored zero on this question than the others in this section. The mean for the question was 15.18. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the most popular question in the drama section, with slightly over one-third of the 
candidates attempting this question. Part (a) of the question asked for a description of the relationship 
between Miss Aggy and Len (Len the child, not the adult); Part (b), a discussion of Miss Aggy and how 
her character illustrated the challenges of single parenting; and finally Part (c), how the playwright‘s 
dramatic presentation of Miss Aggy evoked different feelings from the audience. Some candidates 
concentrated mainly on Miss Aggy‘s relationship with Len with little or no reference to Len‘s relationship 
with her. Others concentrated on Len, the adult. There was also a tendency to generalize on the struggles 
of single parenting, without much textual reference. Some candidates introduced their own narratives of 
childhood experiences. Part (c) was the most challenging. Some candidates omitted this section and 
others tended to describe how Miss Aggy‘s behaviour made the audience feel. Acceptable responses to 
Part (c) included emotional responses such as, admiration (a single-mother who singlehandedly raised her 
son; a shrewd businesswoman; she sacrificed her life for her boy; she was self-made, independent; 
resentment (the way she manipulates Len; her self-hate; the way she fawned on Pastor Greaves, his 
daughter and ‗light-skinned‘ people) and other responses such as anger, exasperation. The answer lends 
itself to positive and negative emotions. 
One hundred and thirty-three (1.37%) of the 9,723 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30–35. Two (0.02%) candidates earned full marks on this question (35). This question had the 
second highest mean for the section. The mean for this question was 18.11. 
Question 4 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to state the different (opposing) views about beauty; to 
discuss how the playwright used characterization to illustrate those opposing views for Part (b), and 
sought from the candidates their impressions of this presentation (of inner and outer beauty) for Part (c). 
Most candidates seemed to have grasped the concept of beauty explored in the play through the use of
characterization. Although some were able to expound on the presentation of inner and outer beauty, 
-8- 
many were unable to give their final impressions on the play as a whole. Acceptable responses for Part (c) 
covered how the playwright explored some of the assumptions about blackness and inverted some of 
these assumptions to reinforce the idea that outside appearance could be deceiving. 
Thirty-two (3.93%) of the 814 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. No 
candidate earned full marks on this question. However, this question seemed to have resonated well with 
candidates. It had the fewest zeros for the drama section and boasted the highest mean of 18.39. 
Poetry
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were ―Forgive My Guilt‖ and ―Epitaph‖. This question reversed the 
trend in that, for this year it attracted about two-thirds of the responses. Part (a) required candidates to 
describe what happened in each poem as it related to death and memory; Part (b) to say how the speaker 
in each poem reacted to the memory of death; and for Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem 
which effectively portrayed the speaker‘s reaction to the death. Part (a) assessed candidates‘ knowledge 
of the poems by asking them to recall, assess and summarise the information. Most candidates responded 
well to this section. For Part (b), candidates were better able to discuss how the speaker reacted to the 
death in ―Forgive My Guilt‖ (grief, contrition, remorse) than in ―Epitaph.‖ In the latter, candidates 
misinterpreted the anger as indifference, not realizing that even if the death did not evoke public outrage 
at the time, now in the re-telling of the tale; the speaker could experience a kind of displaced anger 
(‗brutal sentences‘).
Part (c) which focused on devices (writer‘s craft) posed a challenge. Both poems were replete with 
similes, metaphors, personification, and imagery. Acceptable responses included appropriate 
identification of devices and such devices should make connections to the reaction to the death. These 
responses showed how each device deepened the remorse; heightened the pain and suffering; contained
the rage; and sustained the storytelling imagery. 
Two hundred and twenty-three (1.79%) of the 12,485 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30–35. Sixteen (0.13%) of these candidates earned full marks (35). The mean for this 
question was 15.32. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose two suitable poems from the 
prescribed list to answer the question set. The question asked candidates to select two appropriate poems 
that focused on the theme of love. Part (a) required candidates to describe who or what is loved; Part (b)
to discuss the effects of this love and finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem which is used 
to portray this love. Part (a) was handled well for the most part, although candidates sometimes did not 
always choose poems that they knew equally well. In this part of the question, candidates were expected 
to name the poems selected, and sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. For Part (b), candidates 
were expected to show how this love reflected, reinforced or questioned the love portrayed. Superior 
discussions mentioned whether this emotional response was wholesome and whether the overall effect 
was positive or negative. 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen to the portrayal of love. Some candidates mentioned but did 
not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify the devices. 
Ninety-five (1.44%) of the 6,616 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Ten candidates scored full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 15.57. 
-9- 
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in this the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A 
questions which require close individual study of each text and not the comparative treatment of two 
novels as in former years. Songs of Silence did not seem to be a very popular text. The low popularity 
could be attributed to it being a relatively new text on the market with very little critical material available 
for teachers and students. 
Questions 7 and 8 combined were answered by fewer than 8 per cent of candidates who attempted the 
Prose Fiction section. The candidates who attempted questions on this text demonstrated for the most
part, interesting insights. Question 7 asked for a description of the father-child relationships in the 
chapters, ―A Story with No Name‖ and ―Travellers, or Fathers, or Little Fool-Fool,‖ for Part (a); a 
description of the relationship between Cudjoe Man and his daughter for Part (b); and for Part (c ), a 
commentary on what was suggested by the way the writer presented father-child relationships. 
Essentially, candidates focused on the characteristics/qualities of the relationships portrayed by the 
narrator Marlene and her father and for Part (b), a description of the relationship of Cudjoe Man and his 
daughter; essentially the gentle, caring and protective ways in which he ‗mothered‘ his mentally 
handicapped child. 
Part (c) dealt with the narrative techniques of the writer (cued by the word ‗presents‘). Again, this was the 
most challenging part of the question. Acceptable responses dealt with the two chapters and included, 
among others, the ways in which the writer, through Marlene‘s reflections, explores issues such as 
parental infidelity, single parenting, the ways in which the ‗silenced‘ in society (the most vulnerable) are 
treated, the role of fathers in the home, gossip and folklore, the innocent point of view of the young 
narrator, contrasted with the ‗knowledge‘ of the reader, the contrast presented by the naïve Marlene and 
the adult reflecting. 
Ninety-five (8.53%) of the 1,114 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Eight (0.72%) of the candidates scored full marks on the question. The mean for the question was 19.71. 
Question 8 
Parts (a) and (b) asked candidates for a description of what Marlene found strange or confusing in the 
chapters ―The Idiot‖ and ―Morris Hole.‖ Details included Marlene‘s memory of her mother‘s cautionary 
tale about pride (Pa Brown and the river); boys and their inability to spell; her experience with Ezekiel; 
the river and her experiences there; her sexuality (her budding breasts and Miss Retinella‘s insinuation); 
her confused head (―sometimes my head weave stories…‖). 
Part (c) required candidates to discuss two narrative techniques used to heighten the adolescent‘s 
confusion. The narrative techniques include the use of flashbacks, the contrast presented with the innocent 
narrator juxtaposed with the occasional adult interjections/communal voices; use of symbols, imagery and 
elements of song. 
Nineteen (5.57%) of the 341candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. Three 
(0.88%) candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.70. 
-10- 
The Wine of Astonishment
Question 9 
Part (a) sought candidates‘ response to their analysis of the relationship between Bolo and Bee; Bolo as a 
leader (one who cared for the people) and using Bolo (through characterization as a technique) to develop 
the story. For Part (a), some candidates described the characters rather than focused on the analysis of 
the relationship. However, some were insightful in mentioning how both empowered the villagers in 
different ways—Bolo through warrior-hood and Bee, through faith or spirituality. For Part (b), candidates 
tended to concentrate on instances of Bolo‘s interaction with the people rather than Bee‘s thoughts on 
Bolo and how he must have ‗read‘ Bolo‘s actions as ones which were intended to force the villagers to 
reclaim their manhood. 
While most candidates accepted that Bolo was the central character by their responses to Part (c), many 
did not treat this aspect of technique well and as such, resorted to narration. Acceptable responses should 
include Bolo‘s centrality to the novel and what he symbolizes (the traditional way of life); his centrality to 
the internal conflict in the church when he insists on the elimination of Prince; his contribution to the 
excitement and tension with the standoff with the kidnapping of Primus‘ daughters; his links with the 
major and minor characters and the status he shares with Bee. 
One hundred and five (1.33%) of the 7,902 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 
30–35. Five (0.06%) of the candidates scored full marks (35). The mean for this question was 15.14. 
Question 10 
Only 30 per cent of those candidates who attempted questions on this text chose Question 10. Candidates 
did not manage this question well and generally seemed to have a problem with the word ―ritual‖ in Part 
(c). Part (a) required candidates to make the connection that the steelband and the church (in this instance 
the Spiritual Baptist) have the same bond, the retention of African customs. They make use of music, 
singing and movement. Candidates handled Part (b) very well. They were able to grasp the reasons for 
Eva believing that the spirit has deserted the church. Part (c), which required candidates to deal with the 
significance of religious ritual in the novel was done fairly well. Some of the rituals in the novel include 
the rituals associated with the worship—the singing, shouting, dancing, bell-ringing, ‗catching the spirit‘. 
Seven (0.32%) of the 2,180 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. One 
candidate (0.05%) achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question was 14.24. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
The Short Story section was included in the revised syllabus for this cycle of examinations. This section 
patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, the short stories to be used 
are specified in one question and for the other question candidates choose two appropriate short stories 
from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 are, ―The Day the World Almost Came to an End‖ and 
―Mom Luby and the Social Worker.‖ Almost 60 per cent of the candidates who attempted the short story 
questions did this question. Candidates were asked to describe one humorous incident in each story for 
Part (a); indicate which story they found more interesting, with justification for Part (b); and for Part (c), 
show how the writer creates humour in the telling of these stories. Candidates found Part (a) reasonably 
-11- 
straightforward as they were able to describe a humorous event in each story. A few candidates related 
incidents that were not necessarily humorous. Part (b) sought a comparison with the cue word, ‗more‘ and 
some candidates did not earn full marks for this part of the question because in the discussion, they 
ignored or failed to acknowledge the other story. Part (c) posed a challenge in that candidates tended to 
provide evidence of humour without showing how the humour was created. Candidates are expected to 
discuss the writers‘ craft, for instance, the development of the plot with the rising crescendo and twist, 
which explained the narrator‘s exaggerated response to the booming aircraft in the first story and the use 
of satire to comment on the American welfare system in the other story. 
One hundred and ninety-one (3.46%) of the 5,523 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30–35. Thirteen (0.24%) candidates earned full marks. The mean for this question was 19.37. 
Question 12 
This question concentrated on setting and its contribution to the development of the storyline. Candidates 
were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list. In candidates‘ description of the setting in 
Part (a), many limited their responses to the physical space. However, there were some excellent 
responses, especially from stories such as ―Blackout‖ and ―To Da-Duh, in Memoriam.‖ In responding to 
Part (b), which asked for the significance of the setting to the development of the story, many candidates 
concentrated on the setting and not much on how the setting impacts each story. Part (c) was not handled
well, perhaps because candidates were not as sure about the term ―narrative element‖. Acceptable 
responses discussed elements such as irony, flashback, comparisons, suspense, and dialogue. 
Forty-two (0.09%) of the 2,174 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30–35. 
Two (0.09%) candidates earned full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 16.48. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
1. Text selection and text choice must be given serious consideration. Sometimes poor textual choice 
limits the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer 
the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this is a 
genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs and 
finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students 
to develop the required skills. 
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‗dramatic function‘ and ‗writer‘s craft‘. 
Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected words or 
plotted events for particular effects. 
-12- 
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be 
constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the 
movie version, for instance).
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, describe, determine, 
comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students in this area. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, 
teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the 
language to describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained 
through listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument 
of the writers‘ style, but is also the ‗lived‘ experience. Literature can help students to explore, 
question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, the kind of 
applicability, is what is sometimes captured in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2013 
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of 
three compulsory questions, one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These 
modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for candidates‘ assessment. In each 
question, candidates are required to give approximately five to eight short answers. Twenty marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 60 marks. 
 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. Candidates are required to 
study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be 
used are specified by the examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates must 
choose two appropriate poems from which they have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to 
choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are 
required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. 
Overall, performance improved compared with that of January 2012. This was the second sitting of 
examinations using the new cycle of texts. It was apparent that candidates were prepared for the
examination using the appropriate texts and so performance showed considerable improvement. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer‘s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these elements function 
effectively in the passage 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
3 
Compared to last year, candidates‘ performance on Paper 01 showed improvement in all genres. Overall, 
the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 12.35; in Profile 2, Poetry, 9.29; and Profile 3, Prose 
Fiction, 7.74. The weakest performance was in Prose. 
 
Question 1 
This question had the highest mean. The overall mean was 12.35 out of 20. Overall, 3 (0.33 per cent) of 
the 916 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. No candidate scored zero. The extract 
elicited involvement from the candidates and such resonation was demonstrated in their responses to the 
items. 
Part (a) asked candidates for a description of what was happening in lines 1–8, essentially seeking a 
response which covered the persons, place and main event (the stick-fighting competition). This was well 
done. Part (b), however, was not as well done. Although, candidates were aided by the explanatory notes, 
some could not find two pieces of evidence to support the claim that Inez was a ―mature coquette‖. 
Acceptable responses included all the evidence which supported how well versed Inez was in 
manipulating men to get what she wants. For instance, she speaks charmingly to Joe to ―ease up‖ on 
Swifty (―Give him a chance, Joe‖); she gets Swifty to obey her to ―clean up the place.‖ In fact, her 
attempt to charm Joe is so effective that instead of getting him annoyed, he praises her for ―[taking] over 
the business already.‖ 
Part (c) did not present a challenge for most candidates, but some failed to mention that Swifty‘s leaving 
the bar unattended contributed significantly to Joe‘s ire. In response to Part (d), regarding Inez‘s two 
roles, many candidates mentioned her role as mother/nurturer based on Swifty‘s response to her. 
However, other responses included her being peacemaker/mediator and a ‗boss‘ of sorts. 
By far, Part (e) was the most challenging as candidates could not explain the dramatic function of 
Briscoe‘s question. Acceptable responses included to change the subject; to diffuse the tension; and to 
divert Joe‟s attention from further conflict with Swifty. 
For Part (f), most candidates identified the simile as the figurative device, but as usual floundered in 
commenting on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses captured the comparison of the swiftness of the 
stick-fighter, who moved so quickly that this opponent was not aware of the coming blow until he felt it. 
Part (g) allowed candidates to demonstrate their creativity in suggesting the title and justifying it. A few 
however, presented titles without textual evidence, and thus lost marks. Candidates need to remember that 
reader-response items are always text based. 
Question 2 
Overall, 4 (0.44 per cent) of the 916 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. Two 
candidates (0.22 per cent) scored zero. The overall mean for this question was 9.29. 
Part (a) asked candidates to identify the main event (concert/contest/talent show) and its location (school). 
Most candidates were able to score full marks on this question. Although Part (b) was handled reasonably 
well, some candidates identified the incorrect stanza. Candidates were asked to select a line or phrase 
from the first stanza which describes Brother Kinsley‘s outstanding quality and comment on its 
effectiveness. Phrases included: ―swiftest legs”; “like sharpened blades”; “cutting through the finishing 
tape lines”. All these emphasized his prowess, his superior quality; in essence, how quickly, gracefully 
and efficiently he could run races. 
4 
Part (c) required candidates to describe the speaker‘s attitude to Brother Kingsley and to support their 
response with evidence from lines 9 to12. Many candidates merely mentioned admiration for his dancing 
and many failed to manipulate textual evidence to earn maximum marks. Acceptable responses included 
the way in which his graceful, effortless movements connected earth and air. 
Some candidates hinted at but did not give full treatment to responses in Part (d), which asked for an 
example of contrast and a comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses included: Brother 
Kingsley‟s dancing versus the girl‟s singing (effective because of the stark difference between Kingsley‟s 
talents and popularity against the girl‟s grating, despised rendition which emphasized the unfairness of 
the judge); the entire school versus Miss Stirling‟s judgment OR the symbol of the school versus 
repression OR the booing by all versus Miss Stirling‟s single voice. Any variation of these is effective 
because the contrast underscores the unfair and undemocratic nature of the judging. 
For Part (e), candidates were required to comment on one of the three quotations given. Some candidates 
disregarded the rubric and responded to all three, instead of commenting on one of the three given. Any of 
the following responses would have earned full marks: 
 ―he affected a clutching movement‖ is used to suggest that Brother Kingley‘s action was not 
willful but merely imitative; 
 ―dull unburnished memory gem‖ is used to suggest that the girl‘s performance lacked spectacle, it 
was ordinary; 
 ―a drooping slipper-satin/christian-quattie dress‖ suggests ill-fitting, ordinary, cheap and boringly 
correct attire. 
For Part (f) (i), candidates were required to identify the line where the persona‘s tone changed. Most 
candidates were able to understand the change in tone though some failed to identify the correct line. Part 
(f) (ii) required candidates to explain how the tone changes. Many candidates who attempted the second 
part of the question gave why the tone changed, rather than how the tone changed. The latter was required 
in order to earn full marks. Acceptable responses for the change in tone, Part (a), were line 16, “till he
affected a clutching movement”, and line 18, “Miss Stirling judged that move”. For Part (b), an 
acceptable response is: the tone changed from celebration/admiration to disappointment/a sense of 
grievance. 
Part (g) required candidates to comment on the appropriateness of the title. Some candidates did not 
appear to interpret this question well and presented instead, their own title for the poem. Candidates were 
expected to use textual evidence and respond to the key word concert as in celebration of talent but in this 
instance sarcastically entitled because of the outcome OR a communal condemnation, as in the students 
acting as one to expose Miss Stirling‘s judgement. Essentially, candidates were expected to respond to the 
effectiveness of the word, in light of the poem. 
Question 3 
Overall, the prose question generated the lowest mean (7.74). Candidates did not, for the most part, 
demonstrate a convincing understanding of the passage, especially in areas which required higher order 
comprehension skills. Candidates must attempt all the parts of the question so as to score the highest 
marks possible. In this section, in particular, some candidates did not do all the parts. No candidate scored 
full marks in this section and three (0.33 per cent) of the 916 candidates scored zero. 
Part (a) which asked for a description of the setting was done well. Most candidates were able to earn two 
of the three marks for this question. Acceptable responses included a description of the street/lane, rum 
bar, sea and twilight. 
5 
Part (b) required candidates to use evidence from paragraphs 2 and 3 to describe the relationship between 
Leila and Millie. While candidates were able to mention the girls were friends, many did not refer to the 
evidence from paragraphs 2 and 3 in their responses. Evidence from these paragraphs point to, the girls 
support/trust each other; Millie is the more aggressive/Leila is the more timid. 
For Part (c), candidates were required to comment on one of the quotations given. Some attempted the 
two, instead of one. Again, there was the tendency to explain or paraphrase. Acceptable responses for ―in 
the distance the sun slipped…‖ included those that paid attention to lonely and cold as these words 
seemed to define the relationship; the reinforcement of the relationship/situation through pathetic fallacy; 
the suddenness of night. For ―the smoky noises…‖, acceptable responses included the almost muted 
sounds from inside, merged with the smoke, seeped outside; the heightened contrast of inside/outside; the 
animal-like atmosphere of the inside is contrasted with the colder/cleaner environment occupied by the 
females. 
For Part (d) (i), candidates were required to identify one instance when either Millie or Bradeth was 
sarcastic. Part (d) (ii) required candidates to explain how the example shows sarcasm. Although 
candidates were able to identify the sarcasm in Part (d) (i), the explanation for Part (d) (ii) fell short. 
Some candidates ignored the instructions and supplied responses for both Bradeth and Millie, instead of 
Bradeth or Millie. An acceptable response for Bradeth included: ―check out what a bit of peace and quiet 
feel like, but it‘s not looking like we going to finish the test”. This is a sideswipe/veiled statement that the 
women were a nuisance, preventing the men from enjoying their rest. Another sarcastic remark was 
Bradeth‘s ―a long time now” and by repeating it, he is in fact ‗throwing words‘ at Millie, suggesting 
slyly, that she is the cause of his headache. 
Acceptable responses for Millie included: “You both have a nice sleep, then?” in tone which is 
suggesting, the very opposite. Her use of ―nice‖ is mocking; she hopes they had rotten sleep, and further, 
she disapproves of their sleeping in the first place. Her other remark, ―well now that the testing done” is 
sarcastic in that her pseudo-polite phrasing (―maybe you don‘t mind”) is really a kind of cover for the 
violence of ―testing your backside up to Sandy Bay”. 
Part (e), which asked candidates to suggest two impressions of the men and use evidence to support these
impressions, was fairly well done. However, like many of the questions candidates scored better in one 
part of the question. Candidates scored in mentioning that the men were friends/drinking buddies but 
many did not use the evidence which would allow them to score full marks. Acceptable responses 
included details which supported the fact that they seem to prefer their own company to that of the ladies 
(their controlling/nagging girlfriends); they were unreliable, having stood up the ladies. 
Part (f) was not well done. Candidates were required to suggest one reason why Aunt Toosie may want to 
talk to Bradeth and to justify their response. Candidates missed the inference and could not find 
supporting evidence. Some thought that Bradeth had done a literal test or felt that Aunt Toosie had not 
seen him for a very long time. Acceptable responses included: Aunt Toosie wanted to ask Bradeth about 
his intentions towards her niece; Bradeth may have a different view about the relationship and may be 
hesitant to commit to it; or Bradeth may not be as focused on the relationship as Millie. Marks were also 
awarded if candidates mentioned that Aunt Toosie wanted to talk to him about the drinking. 
Candidates did not appear to be very confident in responding to Part (g). This part of the question 
required candidates to list the sequential points of tension and explain how each point causes the tension 
to rise. Some candidates merely mentioned a point or two with no mention of how each contributed to the 
other. Acceptable responses included: the girls walking purposefully to an unfamiliar street; seeing their 
men lying drunken from a distance; tension building as Leila feels uncomfortable for having encouraged 
Millie to waste time waiting for the men; Millie‟s forceful action of pushing Bradeth away from her; her 
6 
posture, aggression and sarcasm which heighten the tension, plus Bradeth‟s pointed rejoinders, his 
stance (“hind legs first”), like an animal at bay climaxes the tension. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01 
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of style. It 
is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving at 
meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the ‗performance‘ element of the genre. 
 Teachers could assist students to dramatize sections of plays in class — dramatize scenes and 
summarize scenes to encourage recall. 
 Teachers are encouraged to assist students in understanding the rubric of examinations and ensure 
that they do only what is asked. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 23 of the syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and plays; to 
make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgements, states of consciousness and other 
concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from various sections of 
a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgements in well-structured, analytical 
responses in oral and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer‘s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Of the 12 questions in Paper 02, 6 (50 per cent) had candidates earning full marks. Less than 20 per cent 
of the candidates attempted Questions 4, 8, 10 and 12. Question 4, one of the questions on drama 
achieved the highest mean (19.17); the second highest mean was also from the drama questions: Question 
2 with a mean of 18.18. The lowest mean came from Prose Fiction, Question 7, with a mean of 12.03. 
Question 9 on The Wine of Astonishment was the most popular question, with more than 50 per cent of 
candidates attempting it. 
7 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
For Question 1, candidates were required to use evidence from Act 2 Scene1 to support the description 
that (a) Puck was a ―shrewd and knavish sprite‖; (b) describe how his actions cause confusion in the 
magic wood and (c) discuss Puck‘s dramatic function in the play. For Part (a), some candidates had 
difficulty recalling the scene. Acceptable responses included details which captured Puck‟s delight in 
doing mischief to humans and animals (frightening village maidens; skimming off the cream from the 
milk; tricking stallions/colts into thinking there is a filly nearby to name a few). Although some 
candidates listed/mentioned some of Puck‘s actions in the magic wood, responses to Part (b) lacked 
development. Acceptable responses included: he mistakenly enchants Lysander instead of Demetrius and 
Lysander awakes madly in love with Helena and scornful of Hermia; Oberon orders him to make matters 
right and he enchants Demetrius and this causes both men to declare their love for Helena, much to 
Hermia‟s consternation and anger. That same night Puck puts the ass‟ head on Bottom, causing the 
mechanicals to panic and scamper away. 
Part (c) which required a discussion of Puck‘s dramatic function was not handled well. Acceptable 
responses included: the comic humour by his words and actions; his intentional creation of comedy 
(under Oberon‟s orders) of Titania falling in love with an ass; he links the three worlds of the play; he 
closes the play by reminding the audience that they did but slumber and so reinforces the idea that the 
play is an illusion; thus returns the audience to reality. 
The mean for this question is 17.86 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Question 2 
Four couples were listed for candidates to choose one and for Part (a), to describe the personality 
differences between the male and female; Part (b) to describe one situation in which these differences 
were demonstrated and finally, Part (c) to discuss the way in which Shakespeare dramatizes these 
differences. Candidates managed Part (a) reasonably well, in that they were able to grasp that the men 
appeared to be domineering, authoritative, selfish and abusive; whereas the women tended to be 
passionate, accepting, headstrong, gentle and capable of love. Part (b), however, proved somewhat 
challenging in that candidates sometimes were not able to relate the characteristics of the characters with 
the situations. 
Acceptable responses for Part (c) included Shakespeare‘s use of conflict situations as a means of 
dramatizing the differences or contrasts. The use of enchantment (physical and psychological 
transformations as male partners struggle to retain or obtain power over females) and props (for example,
Bottom‘s ass‘ head as part of Oberon‘s attempt to dominate Titania). 
The mean for this question was 18.18 out of a total of 35 marks. 
The following are some recommendations that will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean 
texts and drama as a whole: 
 Teachers/instructors should find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even 
minor ones).
 Candidates should dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Teachers/instructors should identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations and 
discussion of scenes/excerpts. 
8 
 Candidates should practise Part (c) of drama questions, which target the language and 
application of drama. 
 Teachers/instructors should use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic 
techniques work. 
 Teachers/instructors should prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic 
techniques. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
For Part (a), candidates were asked to describe what was happening in Act 1 Scene 1; for Part (b) to 
discuss Miss Aggy‘s understanding of ambition and advancement and finally, for Part (c) to show how 
Rhone explores the ideas of ambition and advancement in the play. Although candidates were asked to 
give the details of the first scene in the play, many had challenges recalling the major incident (Len‘s 
beating because he was caught playing with Pearl by the river, and not at home studying) and a few 
candidates did not correctly identify Miss Aggy‘s relationship to Len. Acceptable responses for Part (b) 
covered Miss Aggy‘s self-hate and her dream of the light-skinned Margaret as the ultimate prize for her 
son (the epitome of advancement and ambition). 
Part (c), which focused on the writer‘s craft proved challenging for many candidates. Acceptable 
responses for Part (c) included the ways in which Rhone allows his audience to see a more balanced view 
of ambition and advancement than what Miss Aggy offers by using Pa Ben as storyteller and character to 
comment on and draw attention to Miss Aggy‟s actions; Pa Ben‟s role as mentor and confidante in 
fostering the relationship between Len and Lois (“the pretty black girl”); using Len and Lois as another 
alternative to Miss Aggy‟s bias, showing that ambition and advancement can come through the black 
middle class; using dramatic irony, contrast and flashback to interrogate Miss Aggy‟s anti-black stance. 
Costuming, props and visual imagery are also used to explore the idea of ambition and advancement. 
The mean for this question was 17.97 out of a total of 35. 
Question 4 
This question registered the highest mean for Paper 02 (19.17). Using the stem, Rhone‟s presentation of 
his characters is what makes this story worth telling, this question asked candidates for Part (a), to
describe two characters they find appealing; for Part (b), to show how one of these characters has his/her 
story to tell and Part (c), to discuss how the character named in Part (b) contributes to suspense in the 
play. Candidates managed Parts (a) and (b) reasonably well, perhaps because these parts were ‗open‘ 
enough for personal interaction. The suspense aspect of the question posed a challenge. Acceptable 
responses included a discussion on how the character selected impacted the drama/story through tension, 
resolution of the conflict, enhancement of the theme(s), and advancement of the plot. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
Part (a) required candidates to describe what was taking place in A Stone‟s Throw and The Woman Speaks 
to the Man Who Has Employed Her son in terms of how women are treated. Candidates had reasonable 
knowledge of the poems (although a few mentioned, wrongly, that the woman was raped by the mob in 
the first poem). Part (b) required candidates to discuss the speaker‘s attitude to the woman in each poem. 
In articulating the speaker‘s attitude acceptable responses for A Stone‟s Throw included the self-righteous, 
9 
smug, haughty and narrow-mindedness of the speakers (men) in their behaviour to exact judgment. The 
speaker in The Woman Speaks to the Man Who Has Employed Her Son is voiced through the concerns of 
a mother in the third-person narrative, who appears to be at the mercy of the don. She, however, has other 
and inner powers to draw on for strength and support as she faces the daunting task of her son‘s imminent 
violent end. 
Part (c) continues to be challenging to candidates. Candidates were asked to identify and comment on 
one poetic device used to explore the treatment of women. Acceptable responses included the use of 
biblical allusions, metaphor, irony, sarcasm, contrast, among others. Many candidates did not lose sight 
of the significance of the biblical allusions in the poems. In A Stone‟s Throw references to ―guru”, ―God￾merchant‖, and the title (―he that is without sin, cast the first stone‖) invoke ideas of supernatural 
intervention on the woman‘s behalf, as the rescuer stands alone against a blood-thirsty mob; hypocrisy 
exposed as no one could stone the woman and generally, the fate of women and their unequal status in 
terms of sexual indiscretion. In The Woman Speaks to the Man Who Has Employed Her Son references to 
Judas Iscariot‘s mother, the father giving gifts (Jesus‘ parable), and the thief on the cross all allude to 
relationships in families, betrayal and death, sin and consequences. 
The treatment of women is seen also through the use of contrast: the mob versus the guru; the scared 
woman versus the blood-thirsty men; the woman versus the man who employed her son. These all 
demonstrate the imbalance of power. 
The mean for this question was 15.28 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name that focus on a significant experience or 
event. Part (a) asked candidates to describe the experience or event; Part (b), to discuss the speaker‘s 
attitude to this experience or event and Part (c), to discuss one device that is used to present this 
experience or event. 
All poems on the syllabus could have been used. Part (c) was as usual, the most challenging as most 
candidates were not able to discuss the effectiveness of the poetic device to present this experience or 
event (even when correctly identified). The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in some 
instances only one device was identified. If this is to be acceptable, candidates must show its effectiveness 
(textually) in both poems. In order to gain full marks, candidates must correctly identify each device, 
show how it is used to portray the event or experience and make a statement of comparison between the 
two poems. 
Here is an example from a candidate who did a fairly good job of showing the effectiveness of a device 
by tying it to the experience/event (in this instance discrimination/racism in the poem ―Dreaming Black 
Boy‖): 
The constant repetition of „I wish‟ illustrates the longing and desire the persona has for 
oppression and blatant discrimination to stop. It is a symbol of grief as he feels helpless to the 
fact that he is oppressed by the white society. The phrase „I wish‟ is far-fetched and may not 
happen. Therefore, it is evident he thinks discrimination against African-Americans would not 
stop. By extension the phrase „I wish‟ reminds us of the famous speech made by civil rights 
activist Martin Luther King Jr which entailed the phrase „I have a dream.‟
The mean for this question was 17.69 out of a total of 35 marks. 
10
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
This was not a popular choice among candidates as less than 4 per cent of the 916 candidates attempted 
this question. The stem read: Songs of Silence is held together by the sure and simple voice of a child but 
interspersed with the voices of adult reflection. Candidates were asked for Part (a), to describe two 
incidents that Marlene the child observes OR experiences in the chapter Effita; for Part (b), to discuss how 
that chapter highlights that the story is being told from a child‘s point of view and finally, for Part (c), to 
discuss how Forbes mixes childhood and adult voices in the novel. Many candidates could not recall the 
details of the chapter and many confused Auntie Sare and Effita. Acceptable responses for Part (a) 
included how Auntie Sare was sustained by the community; Marlene‟s Sunday ritual of taking food to her 
and enduring her long and personal prayers; Effie, the community wailer and the incident in which she 
made the wrong pronouncement. 
Acceptable responses to Part (b) included the fact that the narrator declared that she was nine years old; 
her childish fascination with Auntie Sare‟s prayers; declaring that Auntie Sare was “older than forever”; 
the childish wonder in which Effie‟s actions are captured; repeating phrases from her mother and her 
constant questioning of the inadequacy of her mother‟s responses and generally, her living in „fear‟ of 
her mother. 
Implicit in this part of the question is the writer‘s technique. A few candidates hinted at but did not 
discuss with conviction the elements of Part (c). Acceptable responses to this part included: using 
Marlene as the child narrator or as the adult reflecting through the consciousness of a child; using 
various tones in Marlene‟s voice, for example, language registers (from the Standard to the non￾Standard); using voices of other adult villagers to comment on social issues; using folklore and 
juxtaposing the young naïve Marlene with the adult who looks back. 
The mean for this question was 12.03 out of a total of 35. 
Question 8 
This question was the least popular. Less than 1 per cent of the 916 candidates attempted it. The stimulus 
read: In spite of her insightfulness, Marlene, even as an adult, was still confused by some relationships. 
Candidates were required for Part (a), to describe two instances of Marlene‘s insightfulness in the chapter 
―So Few and Such Morning Songs‘; for Part (b) to describe two instances of Marlene‘s confusion in the 
chapter ―A Story with No Name‖; and for Part (c), to discuss one device that Forbes uses to portray 
insight and confusion in the novel. 
Candidates did not demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the text in order to describe two instances of 
Marlene‘s insightfulness in the chapter ―So Few and Such Morning Songs‖ or her confusion in ―A Story 
With No Name‖. Candidates also did not demonstrate sufficient facility with narrative techniques to 
respond to the final part of the question which asked for one device used to portray insight and confusion 
in the novel. Acceptable responses included: the narrative structure itself which tends to reflect Marlene‟s 
random wanderings; the narrator‟s „head‟ becomes the site of wandering as well („my head don‟t work 
straight…sometimes my head weave stories‟); stories do not support chronological development; 
symbolism, as in silence and the ways in which silence confuses or clarifies issues. 
The mean for this question was 12.33 out of a total of 35. 
11
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
This question was the most popular, garnering more than 50 per cent of candidates‘ responses. The 
stimulus read: ―I want you people to be against me”, Bolo says and his voice, Bee tell me, was a terrible 
cry. ―I want you to be my enemy. I want you to come and take these girls from me”. For Part (a), 
candidates were required to describe the situation in which Bolo poses this challenge; for Part (b), to 
discuss why Bolo would challenge the villagers in this way and for Part (c), to show how Lovelace 
presents the tension between the community and Bolo in the novel. 
Clearly the Bolo/Bee dynamics resonated with candidates and many were familiar with the text. For Part 
(a), candidates were fairly conversant with the issue of Bolo‘s abduction of Primus‘ daughters, Bee‘s role 
in trying to resolve the issue and Bolo‘s defiance of the entire village. Part (b), which asked for the reason 
for Bolo‘s challenging of the villagers was not lost on candidates who discussed Bolo‘s passion in waging 
his one-man war against the men in the village to regain their manhood. Part (c) which dealt with the 
writer‘s presentation of the tension between the community and Bolo was also managed well. Acceptable 
responses included: Bolo‟s challenging of Bee‟s decision to obey the law and stop shouting; Bolo‟s return 
from prison and turning into a bully and the reasons for this; the abduction of Primus‟ daughters; 
through elements such as contrast, figurative devices and symbols. 
The mean for this question was 15.33 out of a total of 35. 
Question 10 
The stimulus for this question read: Eulalie is a marginal, forgotten character in The Wine of 
Astonishment. For Part (a) candidates were required to describe Eulalie; for Part(b), to explain her role in 
the novel and for Part (c), to discuss Lovelace‘s treatment of women in the novel.
Superior responses demonstrated knowledge of Eulalie‘s symbolic role in relation to the Bonasse 
community, whereas weak responses demonstrated limited knowledge of this ‗marginal‘ character. A 
brief description of her yields her being the village belle and future wife of Bolo, only to be taken and 
used by the returning Ivan Morton. Although some candidates had challenges with the word role in Part 
(b), some rightly saw her as the personification of beauty and innocence in the village; she was Ivan‘s 
first ‗victim‘ from the village; her ‗violation‘ must have affected Bolo, whose pride would not allow him 
now to have her. 
Part (c) which asked for the writer‘s treatment of women in the novel, had responses which primarily 
featured Eva, the narrator and matriarch. Other responses included the fact that women are generally 
marginalized; they are victims of the male world. 
The mean for this question was 15.52 out of a total of 35 marks. 
Short stories 
Candidates are asked to prepare ten short stories for this section. Of the 916 candidates attempting the 
Prose Fiction profile 37 per cent attempted the question on short stories. No candidate attained full marks 
for these questions. As with the Poetry, this section contains Type B (comparative) questions. Generally, 
candidates were not conversant with some of the stories. In some instances, only one of the stories was 
studied sufficiently with the other, a mere passing acquaintance. Consequently, candidates lost marks as 
they launched into story telling or repeating of information to ‗pad‘ their responses. 
12
A World of Prose 
Question 11 
―Septimus‖ and ―Emma‖ were used to demonstrate how children and adults see the world with the 
suggested bias that readers preferred the children‘s perspective of the world. Part (a) required candidates 
to provide an outline of the views held by the children; Part (b) required an explanation of the adults‘ 
views on the matter and Part (c) required candidates to say which view is preferred with (textual) 
justification. 
The children in ―Septimus” collectively endorse the view of their parents that everything in the family 
must be shared: the children play together; ‗own‘ the street together and as Septimus would later learn, 
share the goodies together. In ―Emma” the children want to be spontaneous, unpretentious and not full of 
adult restrictions when they grow up. The adults, however, (as in the adult Septimus‘ delight in having an 
entire apple for himself and in ―Emma‖ with the adult play of deceit, betrayal and hypocrisy) tend to have 
opposite views to that of the children. 
Candidates for Part (c) exercised their reader-response skills although some did not base their responses 
too much on textual evidence. There was the tendency here to support the issues with their own narratives 
and this tended to divert their attention from the onus to keep to the ‗facts‘ of the stories. Justification 
requires textual responsibility. 
The mean for this question was 15.06 out of a total of 35 marks. 
 
Question 12 
Referring to the stories ―Shabine‖ and ―Blackout” in the context of ambiguity in malefemale 
relationships, candidates were asked in Part (a), to describe one malefemale relationship presented in 
each story and for Part (b), to show how the ambiguity is presented in each of these relationships and 
finally for Part (c), to discuss one theme that each writer portrays through these relationships. 
Able candidates described the narrator‘s secret fascination with Justine in spite of his grandmother‘s 
warnings (since he is her social superior). The brief bus-stop encounter of the black man and the white 
woman and the stereotypical assumptions form the basis of the relationship in ―Blackout.‖ 
Part (b) proved challenging to some candidates as they had problems understanding the word ambiguity. 
Acceptable responses for ―Shabine” included: the privileged male admirer sees Justine as a seductress 
and appears to be blind to the communal rejection of her; they both desire each other but lack the will to 
take the leap from admiration to action. The norms of North American culture (segregation and racist 
responses) evident in the subtle actions of the woman and the nationalistic pride juxtaposed with strong 
sense of equality affirmed by the West Indian black man in “Blackout” reflect the tension and ambiguities 
the story explores. 
Candidates were able to choose from a range of themes (racial intolerance, gender issues, class, inhibited 
love, black/white relationships) and some were able to apply them to the stories under discussion. 
The mean for this question was 14.14 out of a total of 35 marks. 
13
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, 
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 11–12 (Prose Fiction, Short Stories). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the discrete nature 
of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for students to sharpen their essay￾writing skills.
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of texts, 
for example, websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Attention must be paid to all parts of the question. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and 
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
Candidates need to be reminded that June 2012 was the beginning of the new cycle of texts to be studied 
and examined (with this 2013 being the first January sitting). Knowledge of the revised syllabus is 
necessary. 
For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative questions are those set on the Short Stories
(Questions 11 and 12). All other prose questions are on single texts. Candidates need to select the 
appropriate texts from the revised syllabus in order to be adequately prepared for the examinations. 
CARIBBEAN EXAMINATIONS COUNCIL
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
MAY/JUNE 2013 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION
Copyright © 2013 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved.
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one on each 
mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles 
which form the basis for candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of sub-parts that 
require candidates to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for 
each question, for a total of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from each section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question from this 
section. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one 
of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the 
second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which they have 
studied from the prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and 
the two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the 
poetry section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires 
candidates to choose the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how 
effectively these elements function in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
-3- 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 
2011–2013: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for the Period 2011–2013 
Paper 01 2011
(%)
2012
(%)
2013
(%)
DRAMA 68.13 60.30 54.25 
POETRY 55.46 53.70 57.95 
PROSE 53.93 50.60 59.40 
Unlike the past years, candidates’ performance Drama declined while there was improvement this 
year in the other two genres. 
Question 1: Drama
Overall, 199 (0.98%) of the 20,318 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) asked candidates to refer to lines 1–4 of the dramatic extract and identify Nora’s state of 
mind, supporting their response with one stage direction and one other piece of evidence. Although 
candidates were able to identify Nora’s state of mind (she was sad/upset), many confused stage 
directions with textual evidence. Some identified two stage directions. Acceptable textual evidence 
included: “Oh really! Trying to frighten me!” and “But—No, that’s impossible!” (line 3). 
 
Candidates were asked to explain the dramatic function of the children in Part (b). Acceptable 
responses went beyond describing the children to explaining how their presence impacted Nora and 
even the audience. Thus, the children’s presence reinforces Nora’s maternal qualities (she is kind and 
gentle with them); their presence also reinforces her inner turmoil and the audience senses conflict 
when she admonishes them not to mention the ‘strange man’ who was at the house. 
Part (c) did not pose a challenge to candidates as many were able to comment on the Christmas tree as 
prop. Quite correctly, they mentioned that the tree hinted at setting (time of year, that is, Christmas 
time) and that it acted as a kind of diversion from the tension/conflict. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to use lines 23–26 to state their impression of Nora, with 
supporting evidence. Two marks were awarded for the impression and one mark for the supporting 
evidence. Two general impressions anticipated were that Nora is a multi-faceted woman/her life is 
busy and she will do whatever it takes to preserve her marriage. Candidates demonstrated a general 
knowledge of Nora’s character but lacked the vocabulary required to respond adequately to the 
question posed. They were able to describe the tasks Nora did but fell short in terms of using those 
ideas to form an impression or a conclusion. 
Candidates experienced difficulty stating one contradiction shown in Nora’s character, which was 
required for Part (e), although they managed to find evidential support in some instances. Embedded 
in the contradiction is Nora’s two-sidedness – the devoted wife and mother and the mother who 
encourages her children to lie; the good home-maker who cannot settle on any task or get a chance to 
do so and the loving wife who lies to her husband. 
-4- 
For Part (f), candidates were asked to explain the dramatic function of Helmer’s entrance. Many 
candidates realized the significance of the entrance but far too many could not use the literary 
language to bolster their response. Acceptable responses included: breaking/heightening the tension; 
adding to the suspense; breaking Nora’s train of thought.
Candidates displayed creativity and imagination in their responses to Part (g), which required them to 
imagine being Nora and use evidence from the extract to suggest how they wanted the audience to 
respond to them. 
Four thousand three hundred and fifty-three that is approximately 19 per cent of the 20,318 candidates 
who attempted Question 1 earned marks between 15 and 20. The mean for this question was 10.85 out 
of 20. This was the lowest mean achieved of the three genres tested. 
Question 2 
One hundred and eighty-three (0.90 %) of the 20,343 candidates who attempted this question scored 
full marks. 
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying the phrase (‘almost forgotten my dream’/ ‘my 
dream’) that captured the main idea in lines 1–6. 
Part (b) required candidates to identify the device in line 5 (simile) and comment on its effectiveness. 
The speaker compares the dream to the sun, a symbol of hope, life and possibilities. Most were able to 
identify the device and some gave reasonable responses regarding the effectiveness. 
Part (c) required candidates to discuss the effect of the repeated word (‘rose’) in lines 7, 8 and 11. 
Acceptable responses mentioned the development of the notion of progression and or entrapment. 
Thus, the magnification of the wall (representing obstacles) and the way in which the word ‘rose’
ends line 7 and begins line 8, present the encirclement or entrapment of the speaker. 
Part (d) (i) required candidates to identify the speaker’s tone in lines 1–12 
(reflective/nostalgic/conversational) and lines 20–29 (militant/determined/strident) and (d) (ii) 
required them to comment on the appropriateness of the change. Candidates were able to note the 
difference in tone at the beginning of the poem and towards the end. However, the discussion fell 
short in terms of why this change was appropriate. Acceptable responses captured the hope embodied 
in the dream at the outset, then the wall and finally the need to encourage himself to overcome the 
challenges in order to liberate himself. 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to state what was suggested by the use of “shadow,” “wall,” and 
“night” in (i) and for (ii), show how “dream,” “sun,” and “light” were opposed to (i). This was 
challenging to many candidates who interpreted the words in (i) in the very literal sense of a 
nightmare that the speaker was experiencing while he was asleep. Consequently, the words “dream,” 
“sun,” and “light” were erroneously interpreted as morning which brings sunlight, or the persona 
awakening from an unpleasant dream. Full marks were awarded to candidates who mentioned that the 
second set of words suggests hope and that the first set of words suggests entrapment and a strong 
sense of being unable to overcome obstacles. 
Most candidates managed to respond appropriately to Part (f), which asked for an explanation of line 
24: “Help me to shatter this darkness”. The speaker recognizes that he is in a state of defeat and 
pleads for assistance (perhaps from a higher power) to destroy this oppressive darkness or wall. 
Most candidates did exceptionally well on part (g), both in providing another title for the poem and 
using text-based evidence to justify their choice. Some responses included the idea that the title 
heightened the persona’s struggle to recapture what was lost; that it focused on the persona’s past and
that it encouraged reflection or introspection. 
-5- 
Five thousand, four hundred and sixteen (approximately 21%) of the 20,343 candidates who 
attempted this question earned marks between 15 and 20. The mean for this question was 11.59 out of 
20. 
Question 3 
The mean score (11.88) on Prose Fiction was the highest of the three genres. Four thousand six 
hundred and twenty-one (approximately 19%) of the 20,319 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 15 and 20. Eighteen (0.09%) candidates earned the full marks out of 20. 
Most candidates had a fair sense of what the passage was about and were able to answer Part (a) 
which asked for an outline of the passage. Acceptable responses took into account the fact that the old 
man had caught no fish; the concern of the boy and the old man’s disposition/strength. 
Part (b) required from candidates an identification of the mood in the first paragraph 
(despair/hopelessness/sadness) and to provide supporting evidence from the passage. Candidates had 
little difficulty with evidence from the passage. Some lost marks as evidential support given was not 
confined to the first paragraph. 
Characterization appeared to be understood by candidates. Part (c), which asked for two aspects of the 
boy’s character, with supporting evidence, was well handled. Any two of these character traits were 
acceptable: caring, compassionate, dutiful, and obedient. Candidates cited evidence such as the boy’s 
helpfulness in carrying the old man’s fishing and sailing gear; his being sorry for the old man; and 
that he reluctantly obeyed his parents’ command to leave the old man. 
Although candidates correctly identified the device in Part (d) as simile, they had challenges in 
commenting on its effectiveness. Some struggled with an explanation and commented that because a 
desert is a dry place, the simile is ineffective since it is no place for fishes to live. However, the 
effectiveness lies in its literary not literal meaning: a desert conjures up images of absence (of food 
and water); the landscape of a desert tends to be bleak and ravaged and this image is connected to the 
old man—nature’s harsh, enduring, unproductive (fishless) landscape. 
For Part (e), two marks were awarded for the effect created by the detailed description of the old man 
in paragraph 2, and one mark awarded for justification. Acceptable responses included how he was 
initially presented as thin and gaunt but as the paragraph developed he is seen as physically strong.
 
Part (f) asked candidates to explain why they might find the impression created by the final paragraph 
unexpected. Acceptable responses indicated the difference between what the reader expected based on 
the information given in the first paragraph as against what was presented in the final paragraph. 
Structurally, the final paragraph is the shortest. It ends with the refusal to be defeated; it testifies to the 
old man’s inner strength (evident in his eyes), unlike the other paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01
Teachers are encouraged to continue working with students to hone their skills in appreciating and 
responding to literature. In the examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a 
careful reading of the evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the 
strategies that will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events 
described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some students 
use in their responses to the questions.
-6- 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations 
and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, 
bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the 
critical and creative thinking that the study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on Page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, 
poems and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of 
consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday
living
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various 
sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques 
in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviou). This skill is 
tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular 
text
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature. 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Questions 1 and 2, which are set on the Shakespeare text A Midsummer Night’s Dream, attracted 
almost one-half of the total responses for the drama section. Question 1 was more popular than 
Question 2, and was attempted by more than half of the candidates. 
 
This question sought to elicit from candidates, a discussion on male dominance in the play. Part (a) 
asked for an outline of two situations in which such issues occur; Part (b) required a discussion of 
how women deal with the identified situations and Part (c), a discussion of one dramatic technique 
that Shakespeare uses to present the issue of male dominance. Candidates demonstrated familiarity 
with the theme of male dominance and were able to use male/female relationships relating to 
daughters and lovers to discuss Part (a) and use examples of Hermia, Titania and Helena for the 
discussion in Part (b). A few candidates referred to the mechanicals (the all-male cast) and lost marks 
here. Part (c) however, proved the most challenging in terms of identification of the technique and 
discussion of its function. Weak candidates repeated and narrated the theme of male female 
relationships in the play. In some instances, dramatic irony was named but arguing its relevance was 
not convincing. Accepted responses include plot development, characterization (comparison and 
contrast), use of suspense and dramatic tension. 
-7- 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays and 142 (2.13%) of the 6,554 
candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 35. Two (0.03%) of these 
candidates earned full marks (35). The mean for this question was 17.31. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to outline the situation that caused Helena’s accusation of 
Hermia in Act III Scene 2, from which the quotation came; Part (b) asked for a description of the 
aspects of the personalities of Helena and Hermia that were brought out in this exchange and Part (c), 
a discussion of Shakespeare’s presentation of friendship in the play. 
Generally, candidates failed to recall this particular incident accurately. Some were able, to some 
degree, to identify the incident in the forest triggered by Puck’s inadvertent enchantment of Lysander 
and the consequences, required in Part (a). Candidates were also able to note the similarities and 
differences in these women. Predictably, Part (c) which sought to discuss the presentation of
friendship, (which really is a discussion of the how) was the most challenging. Candidates tended to 
recount what happened in the play without drawing meaningful conclusions about friendship (what is 
suggested). Typical responses to this part of the question were literal. Few candidates were able to 
discuss the different ideas about friendship that were suggested and or identify how techniques such 
as contrast, irony, and characterization were used to highlight issues about friendship. 
Seventy-eight (2.28 %) of the 1,822 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Eight (0.44%) of these candidates earned full marks. The mean for the question was 16.24. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the most popular question in the drama section. Part (a) asked for a description of 
what was happening (in reference to the quotation from Act I, Scene 1); Part (b), a discussion of Miss 
Aggy’s idea of the perfect wife for Len and finally, Part (c), a discussion of how the playwright’s 
dramatic presentation of black/white relationships is a powerful aspect of this play. 
Though both incidents have to do with women of whom Miss Aggy disapproved, many candidates 
referred to the river incident with Pearl and Len (instead of the photograph incident) for Part (a). 
Acceptable responses described Miss Aggy receiving a letter from Len which included a picture of his 
wife Lois, her rage and rejection of Lois and Pa Ben’s advice. Most candidates handled Part (b), 
which asked for Miss Aggy’s idea of a perfect wife for Len, quite well. Part (c) required a broader 
treatment than a description of black and (near)-white characters. Discussion should relate to the play 
as a whole, in terms of Rhone’s presentation of black/white relationships. Acceptable responses for 
this part of the question included major characters and what they represent; interrogations of 
whiteness as good and black as bad or evil; the ways in which the play can be making social 
commentaries in terms of value systems, dramatic irony (inversions of roles). 
Four hundred and sixty-seven (4%) of the 11,980 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30 and 35. Eight (0.07%) candidates earned full marks of 35 on this question. The 
mean for this question was 18.92, which was the second highest mean for a question in this section. 
-8- 
Question 4 
This was the least popular question on this paper, as only 250 candidates attempted it. 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to outline the situation that caused Pa Ben to make 
the comment quoted in Act II, Scene 3. Many could not remember the incident (Len’s visit to Pa 
Ben’s house in a bid to save Lois from his mother’s harm). Part (b) asked for a discussion of two of 
the three listed cultural practices (story telling, church going and belief in the supernatural). Even 
though prompts were provided in the wording of the question, many could not see these folk forms as 
dramatic technique. Part (c) asked candidates to comment on two themes brought out by these 
presentations. Acceptable responses included, (but were not limited to) history, or the past, religion, 
culture, identity, race, and class. 
 
Two of the 96 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 35. No candidate 
earned full marks on this question. The mean for this question was 13.82. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were, “It is the Constant Image of Your Face” and “Dreaming Black 
Boy”. Slightly more than half of the candidates attempted this question. Part (a) required candidates 
to outline the hopes and desires portrayed in each poem; Part (b) asked for a discussion of the poem 
found to be more appealing; and for Part (c) the task was to discuss one device from each poem which 
portrayed hopes or desires. 
Part (a) assessed candidates’ knowledge of the poems by asking them to recall, assess and summarise 
the information. Although candidates were more knowledgeable about “Dreaming Black Boy”, most 
responded well to this part of the question. The personal, yet text-based responses, provided for Part
(b) were refreshing and informative. Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft),
posed a challenge for many candidates. In many instances devices were mentioned but the discussion 
was vague and lacked textual support. Many did not link the device with hopes or desires. Acceptable 
responses included appropriate identification of devices and such devices and establishment of the 
connection between such devices and the hopes or desires. 
Words that were commonly misspelt included repetition, racism and prejudice 
Fourteen hundred and forty-four (approximately 14%) of the 10,304 candidates who attempted this 
question earned marks between 30 and 35. Fifty-four (0.52%) of these candidates earned the full 
mark of 35. The mean for this question was 20.13. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose from the prescribed list two 
poems that focused on the theme of conflict to answer the question set. Any relevant poems could be 
used but popular choices were, “Forgive My Guilt”, “Once Upon a Time”, “The Woman Speaks to 
the Man who Has Employed her Son.”, “This is the Dark Time, My Love”, “Dulce et Decorum Est” 
and “Epitaph” . Part (a) required candidates to describe this conflict (whether external or internal); 
Part (b) asked candidates to comment on how the conflict is treated or addressed in each poem and 
finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem which is used to explore this conflict. 
Part (a) was handled well for the most part. In this part of the question, candidates were expected to 
name the poems selected but sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. For Part (b), some 
candidates had difficulty with the word “comment” as they thought it meant solving the conflict. 
-9- 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of conflict. Some candidates 
mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify the devices and 
treated the discussion as a continuation of Part (b). 
Four hundred and forty-five (approximately 5%) of the 9,617 candidates who attempted this question 
earned marks between 30 and 35. Twenty-one candidates scored full marks on this question. The 
mean for this question was 16.80. 
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A 
questions. These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the comparative 
treatment of two novels. Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular although for this sitting: the 
number of candidates attempting the questions set on this text increased marginally. 
Many of the candidates who attempted questions on this text demonstrated interesting insights. Part 
(a) of Question 7 asked for an outline of two of these three chapters: “The Idiot,” “Miss Minnie” and 
“Morris Hole”. Part (b) asked for a discussion of how the writer presents the confusion in the 
adolescent’s world in the chapters selected in (a); and for Part (c), a justification of the chapter which 
is more appealing. 
 
Many candidates went beyond the level of “outline” in Part (a) while others went to the extreme of 
storytelling. A few candidates misread the rubric and commented on all three chapters. Candidates’ 
ability to organize and summarise significant events in the chapters was the main skill tested. 
Candidates found Part (b) challenging in that they did not deal with the writer’s presentation of 
confusion as some neither identified nor discussed a technique. Acceptable responses included the use 
of proverbs and the story of Marlene’s mother and Pa Brown to frame her relationship with Ezekiel; 
relying on village gossip to explain strange incidents; the episodic, staccato-like collage of images
and/experiences mirroring the confusion in Marlene’s mind; the use of imagery, dreams and the river.
 
Part (c) was primarily reader-response, (with the requisite textual justification). Candidates managed 
reasonably well as they demonstrated familiarity with the text. 
One hundred and nine (9.9%) of the 1,041 candidates who attempted this question earned marks 
between 30 and 35. Six candidates scored full marks on the question. The mean for the question was 
21.57. 
Question 8 
By referring to two characters in the novel, Question 8 asked for a discussion of the statement, 
“Forbes presents silence as a refuge in the novel Songs of Silence.” Many candidates identified 
suitable characters who portray silence, for example, Paul’s mother in ‘A Story with No Name’, 
Marlene the narrator, and other characters such as Miss Minnie, Effita, Nathan and Little Fool Fool. 
Candidates were also conversant with the concept of silence as refuge. For candidates to have gained 
maximum marks there needed to have been stronger identification and discussion of 
devices/techniques to present the many nuanced silences in the text. Acceptable responses included 
symbolism; interplay between what is said and what is not; and contrast and comparison. 
Forty-eight (5.15%) of the 912 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 and 
35. One candidate scored full marks. The mean for this question was 19.38. 
-10- 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
Twice the number of candidates attempted this question, compared with the number attempting
Question 10. Part (a) asked candidates to trace the rise of Ivan Morton; Part (b), a comparison 
between the leadership style of Ivan and Bee and Part (c) required an analysis of the ways in which 
the tension between Ivan and Bee dramatise the clash between the old ways and the new. 
For Part (a), many candidates gave details about Ivan without showing how he developed. By missing 
the concept of trace, candidates ignored the chronological element embedded in the task (many did 
not even mention Ivan the boy). Because the text is not chronologically sequenced, this might be part 
of the challenge faced by candidates. For Part (b), candidates were knowledgeable about the 
leadership styles but the details supplied sometimes were not germane to the question. In some 
instances, candidates did not draw inferences from details given. For example, when Ivan moved into 
the Richardson’s house, what did his actions suggest? How might that inform his leadership? Part (c) 
was handled commendably. Candidates saw the tension represented by these men in terms of the old 
ways (tradition, roots, the folk) and any threat to that way of life. Many were sensitive to the tension 
portrayed in the comparison, the writer’s use of suspense and many candidates mentioned the near 
explosive scene when Ivan told Bee that his people could “act white” as a means to survive. 
One hundred and seventy-four (2.59%) of the 6,582 candidates who attempted this question earned 
marks between 30 and 35. Three candidates scored full marks of 35. The mean for this question was 
16.62. 
Question 10 
Referring to Bee telling Eva, “I going to break this law,” candidates were asked to discuss the ways in 
which the Wine of Astonishment explores the idea of resistance and rebellion. Although weaker 
candidates resorted to storytelling, the idea of resistance resonated well with candidates as there was 
little difficulty identifying incidents and characters involved. Some candidates listed points (as with 
pros and cons) a practice that is not encouraged. In some instances, candidates lacked the vocabulary 
to express themselves and knowledge and usage of certain words (as in passive, active, non-violent, 
non-insurrectionary, retaliate), which could have helped. Additionally, candidates lacked awareness 
of basic historical fundamentals about the plot, such as (the American presence in Trinidad at that 
time). Popular responses included the collective resistance of the church led by Bee and the 
Bolo/Prince confrontation. 
Forty-eight (1.44%) of the 3,186 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Two candidates achieved the maximum score on this question. The mean for this question
was 15.33. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
The Short Story section patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, 
the short stories to be used are specified in one question, while for the other question; candidates 
choose two appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were, “Blackout” and “To Da-duh, in Memoriam.” It 
asked candidates to make the connection between setting and plot. Candidates were asked to describe 
the setting of each story in Part (a). Part (b) offered options for the candidate to show how the writer 
used descriptive language or dialogue or contrast to develop the story. Part (c) asked for an 
explanation of the significance of setting in the development of each story. 
-11- 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward. Some candidates disregarded the rubric for Part 
(b) and discussed more than one technique. Acceptable responses for this part included the use of 
descriptive language to evoke mood; description of landscape; dialogue to reinforce attitudes and; 
perceptions; and contrast (from the perspective of character, setting, intentions). 
Part (c) posed a challenge in that candidates displayed limited knowledge of the significance of setting 
to the development of the story. Acceptable responses included the ways in which the setting (as in 
“Blackout”) provides the background and reasons and attitudes of the positions taken by the two 
characters (the sense of superiority of the woman as against the nationalistic pride of the man). The 
two settings in “To Da-duh, in Memoriam” become the representation of the two main characters 
(rural Barbados and cosmopolitan New York) and the conflict between native tropical elements and
the modernizing effect of the metropolis. 
Here is an example of a good response to Part (c):
The white woman is in mental darkness and fails to see the ‘light’ that the man is showing her that all 
men are created equal. In the end, it is not he who needs to take a ‘light’ from her (cigarette or 
otherwise) it is she who must take a ‘light’ (knowledge and acceptance) from him. Also, in ‘To Da￾Duh in Memoriam’, the story starts off with the narrator not being able to see, as the airport is dark 
and somewhat crowded, obscuring her view. She eventually sees Da-Duh, as she is standing in the 
light in her white dress and trying to find her way to them. Similarly, the [narrator] was in ‘darkness’ 
thinking that her world of technology was all there was, and was better, only to come to Barbados 
and see the flaws in her lifestyle and the emptiness of it…setting is significant in both stories and the 
‘darkness’ can be taken both literally and symbolically as it represents the need for some kind of 
‘light’ in order to see clearly. 
Twenty-four (0.67%) of the 3,410 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. One candidate earned the full mark of 35. The mean for this question was 14.49. 
Question 12 
In this question candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list and in Part (a), 
to describe the love relationship portrayed in the two stories: Part (b) asked for a discussion of how 
the attitudes displayed by two characters affect the outcome of the relationship and Part (c), an 
identification of and commentary on one device used by the writer to convey his/her view of the 
relationship. Some candidates lost marks because they included inappropriate texts (such as poems, 
drama texts and novels). Apart from naming and discussing devices, candidates generally 
demonstrated a degree of weakness in writing the comparative essay. 
Eighty-four (1.68%) of the 4,973 candidates who attempted this question earned marks between 30 
and 35. Two candidates earned full marks for this question. The mean for this question was 15.79. 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02
On the whole, many essays were well structured, coherent and cohesive. Teachers should be 
commended for their hard work. However, more attention needs to be given to the acquisition of 
knowledge of literary terms and dramatic techniques, the ability to discuss their use by the playwright 
and to comment on their effectiveness. We urge teachers/instructors to continue to emphasize and 
recognize genre-specific terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness. 
-12- 
1. Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of preparation for the 
examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short stories) limits the depth of the 
discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to 
answer the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as 
this is a genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken 
the analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs
and finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker 
students to develop the required skills.
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‘dramatic function’ and ‘writer’s 
craft’. Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected 
words or plotted events for particular effects.
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be 
constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not 
the film version, for instance). 
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, describe, 
determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by dedicating time to closely 
examining the nature of the response expected by each of these and other key words used in 
questions. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and or reading the poems, for instance, 
teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be empowered to master the 
language to describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and 
gained through listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an 
instrument of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to 
explore, question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, 
the kind of applicability, is what sometimes emerged in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE®
 EXAMINATION 
JANUARY 2014 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
2 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) examination in English B consists of 
two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, 
one from each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are 
the content profiles which form the basis for candidates’ assessment. In each question, 
candidates are required to give approximately five to eight short answers. Twenty marks are 
allocated for each question for a total of 60 marks. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged under three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Section A, Drama, consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on 
specific texts. Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one 
question from this section. 
Section B, Poetry, consists of two Type B questions. These are questions of comparison. 
Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the syllabus. For one of the 
questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the examiner. However, for the 
second question, Question 6, candidates must choose two appropriate poems from which they 
have studied to answer the question set. Candidates are required to answer one question from 
this section. 
Section C, Prose Fiction, consists of six questions. The two novels (Questions 7–10) are Type A 
questions. The short story consists of Type B questions. Candidates must answer one question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. 
Of the 12 questions on this paper, five had candidates earning full marks. Prose (Question 11) 
achieved the highest mean (22.41); the second highest mean was from Drama (Question 2 with a 
mean of 19.69). The lowest mean came from Prose (Question 8) with a mean of 7.92 out of a 
total of 35 marks for each question. 
3 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills: 
 Comprehension 
 Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a 
given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to say how these 
elements function effectively in the passage. 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props. 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive. 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters. 
Compared with 2013, candidates’ performance on Paper 01 showed improvement in the Poetry 
and Prose Fiction profiles. Overall, the mean performance in Profile 1, Drama, was 9.69; in 
Profile 2, Poetry, 10.73; and Profile 3, Prose Fiction, 8.03. The weakest performance was in 
Prose Fiction. 
 
Question 1 (Drama) 
This question had the lowest mean. For Part (a), many candidates misinterpreted aspects and 
gave responses which merely stated the familial relationship between the two men 
(uncle/nephew). Acceptable responses should (keeping to lines 1–10) focus on the character 
traits of the men, for example, Petu was authoritative and authoritarian whereas Ato, the nephew 
being submissive, deferred readily to Petu’s commands. Part (b) asked for two functions served 
by the stage directions starting from line 10 and ending at line 20. Some candidates restated the 
stage directions whereas others responded appropriately to include the following: they serve to 
inform the audience that time has elapsed; that Ato wastes no time in obeying Petu; that time has 
elapsed since Ato’s appearance and disappearance; and that Eulalie’s smoking and drinking 
reflect her attitude to the community’s traditions. 
Again the word aspects in Part (c) appeared to be problematic to candidates. Instead of focusing 
on the nature of the relationship between the couple, candidates provided ‘surface’ responses that 
essentially restated factual information from the extract, such as, Ato and Eulalie were married. 
4 
Some candidates did not provide sufficient justification for the aspects of the relationship 
identified, whereas some identified aspects with no justification. Acceptable responses should 
take into account the fact that the couple is still very much in love with each other (they still can 
share a joke and they have private names for each other). Also, Ato is protective of her (advising 
her not to drink too much). 
In response to Part (d), although candidates understood what the question demanded, some 
responses were not as comprehensive and comments were mainly made about Eulalie’s drinking 
and smoking. Responses should also include her disgust and resistance to the traditions of her 
husband’s family.
Candidates were comfortable with Part (e) which dealt with tension and gave acceptable 
responses such as the tension intensifies towards the end because the playwright increased the 
tempo of the action by the shortened lines of dialogue, increased use of stage directions and the 
use of questions. 
Part (f) allowed candidates to demonstrate their creativity in suggesting the title and justifying it. 
A few however, presented titles without textual evidence, and thus lost marks. Others ‘lifted’ 
words from the extract such as “taboo”, “Ato” and “Eulalie” without critical application. 
Candidates need to remember that reader-response items are always text-based. 
Question 2 (Poetry) 
Most candidates earned full marks for Part (a) which asked for three things about the bayou (a 
place of mystery, habitat for frogs and grasshoppers, mossy). 
Apart from mentioning the mystery, many candidates could not show how stanza 1 was 
connected to stanza 2. Acceptable responses for Part (b) should include the following: stanza 1 
introduces the idea of the allure of buried or sunken pirate treasure, while stanza 2 seems to take 
the reader on a treasure-hunting expedition where travellers seem to enter a world “dripping in 
mystery”; stanza 2 further develops the mystery introduced in stanza 1 by suggesting that beyond 
buried treasure, there might be even some live, dangerous creatures lurking beneath the surface. 
Although candidates were able to identify the device in stanza 2 that Part (c) required them to 
provide, many failed at explaining the effectiveness. Acceptable responses of the device 
included, personification/metaphor (“the bayou sweats”); metaphor/imagery (“dripping in 
mystery”); and imagery appealing to sight (“murky”) and sound (“hushed in secrecy”). All 
devices point to the idea of a heightening of the tension/excitement surrounding the bayou’s 
hidden and perhaps dangerous secrets. 
5 
For Part (d), candidates gave vague responses and the word impressions appeared to have been a 
challenge. Acceptable responses should indicate that the impression is created that mortal 
danger lurks in the bayou and this can come from any of the creatures/monsters which can grip, 
clench, snap and hold. 
Most candidates gave reasonable responses to Part (e) and mentioned the use of phrases like, 
holds a mystery, movements unknown, dripping in mystery to suggest the notion that the person 
is viewing the bayou from a distance. For Part (f), candidates tended to view stanza 4 in isolation 
and therefore missed how it is connected to the poem as a whole. Acceptable responses should 
mention how it reinforces the idea of mystery and danger to those who venture in it; “guardian 
trees” which suggest that the vegetation serves to protect its secrets from intruders; the image of 
the empty canoe drifting suggests that the human occupant(s) has/have been destroyed by the 
bayou or the creatures there — a general reinforcement of danger throughout the poem. 
Some candidates did not exercise creativity in Part (g). However, others gave acceptable 
responses in describing and substantiating the mystery—there is a monster in the water; there is 
no danger but a feeling of dread created by the atmosphere and vegetation. 
Question 3 (Prose) 
Candidates performed satisfactorily on Part (a) which asked for two reasons for Amabelle’s visit 
to Kongo (to ask his approval for the elder to visit him to talk about Joel’s accident and to make 
an offer to pay for Joel’s funeral). However, many failed to be specific in their responses, 
providing vague or incorrect assumptions as their answers. For instance, many stated that 
Amabelle visited Kongo because she wanted to ask him something or she sought to tell him that 
the elder wanted to see him, suggesting then that Kongo was being summoned by the elder, 
rather than the elder wishing to visit him. 
For Part (b), candidates were also able to provide the two versions of Joel’s death as presented in 
the extract — accident and homicide. Many scored full marks on this item. For Part (c), some 
candidates were able to accurately identify Kongo’s feelings (grief/sorrow) and that his over￾emphasized actions disguised his emotions (for example, digging flour from his fingernails and 
taking snuff to steady himself). 
For Part (d), candidates were able, for the most part, to identify the simile and a few gave 
reasonable responses about its effectiveness. However, many candidates merely explained what 
weeds are/do. Those who responded appropriately, mentioned Joel being one with nature or his 
being independent/self-reliant, bringing out the notion that weeds need very little, if any, special 
treatment to flourish. Candidates found Part (e) quite challenging. Generally they could not 
explain what was ironical in the way Joel was buried. Many commented on the fact that he was 
6 
buried naked. Candidates could not make the link between the father giving Joel a ceremonial 
burial and a typical ceremonial burial. Ideally, candidates were expected to note that all the 
trappings of a ‘decent’ burial were removed yet his father’s description of the burial ritual made 
Joel into a kind of cosmic royalty. 
Some candidates knew what was required for Part (f) but lacked the literary language to express 
themselves. Essentially, Kongo’s measured, controlled, simple and affectionate choice of 
words/expressions seem extraordinary, heroic and regal. His tendency to repeat reinforces his 
sense of loss but also (especially when he repeats “my son”) shows grief, pride and affection. 
Part (g) asked to state what was suggested in line 26 (“Tell him I am a man….He was a man, too, 
my son.”). Many candidates only captured the fact that his refusal of financial aid for the burial 
of his son suggests he is independent and missed the opportunity to suggest that Kongo believes 
that he needs to be treated with respect regardless of his position. 
Recommendations 
 Teachers/instructors should continue to provide opportunities for students to be exposed to 
literature. 
 Discussing the effectiveness of literary devices must be the focus of continued analysis of 
style. It is not good enough to merely identify or define devices. 
 Candidates in general need to base their inferences on a careful reading of the evidence in the 
passage as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will assist them in arriving 
at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
 Candidates are encouraged to watch live and recorded plays so that they are better able to 
appreciate the ‘performance’ element of the genre. They need to focus some more on the 
dramatic function of stage directions. 
 Teachers could help students to dramatize sections of plays in class, dramatize scenes and 
summarize them to encourage recall. 
 Teachers are encouraged to assist students in understanding the rubric of examinations so 
that they do only what is asked. 
7 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions 
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 23 of the 
syllabus): 
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, poems and 
plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of 
consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday 
living 
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis 
(the ability to bring together and condense, in a new form, information drawn from 
various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, 
analytical responses …and written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
 The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
 The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various 
techniques in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). 
This skill is tested throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text 
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature 
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
For Question 1, candidates were asked to describe the challenges faced by one of these couples: 
Lysander and Hermia or Demetrius and Helena before their wedding. Part (b) asked for a 
description of how the challenges identified in Part (a) are resolved and Part (c), Shakespeare’s 
use of the couples’ experience to demonstrate that marriage is an important social institution. 
Although some candidates resorted to narration of the couples’ stories, many identified 
appropriate challenges, for instance, Egeus’ objections to Lysander and his insistence that 
8 
Hermia marry Demetrius; under the enchantment Lysander professes love to Helena and rejects 
Hermia; Egeus supporting the idea that Demetrius should be Helena’s husband or generally, 
society’s patriarchal laws and their impact on these couples. 
Part (b) was also reasonably attempted. Part (c) however, posed a challenge as many candidates 
were not able to make the link that Shakespeare’s dramatic presentation of marriage forms part 
of the climax. This part of the question asked candidates to show how Shakespeare uses the 
couples’ experience to demonstrate that marriage is an important social institution. This implicit 
use of technique (via the marriages) is a typical feature of comedies and candidates missed this. 
Generally, candidates tended to speak more about love than marriage, missing the point that the 
marriages offer resolution and consolidation, thus endorsing the notion that it is worthwhile and 
desirable. 
The mean for this question was 17.94. 
Question 2 
Candidates handled this question better than Question 1. Part (a) asked for a description of one 
of the incidents which occurs in the magic wood and Part (b), a discussion of the outcome of this 
incident. Part (c) asked for an examination of how this incident relates to the title of the play. 
Although few candidates narrated, most confined their discussion to the woods. For Part (a), 
acceptable responses included the consequences of Oberon’s malice and Puck’s enchantment. 
Part (b) was not handled well as some candidates could not separate the incident from the 
outcome and in cases where the outcome was mentioned, it was not discussed. Acceptable 
responses included the ways in which Puck ‘re-enchants’ the enchanted ones back to the right 
ways of seeing or the ways in which the illusion is removed so characters are back to normal. 
Relating the incident to the title (as was asked for in Part (c)) was handled fairly well. Even 
responses that were weak in Parts (a) and (b), scored well here as candidates were able to explore 
issues such as magic, dream, the fantastical and the suspension of reality. 
The mean for this question was 19.69. 
Recommendations 
A few recommendations that will enable candidates to better appreciate Shakespearean texts (and 
drama as a whole) are given below. 
 Teachers should find creative ways to get students to summarize scenes (even the minor 
scenes). 
9 
 Students should be encouraged to dramatize scenes to aid recall. 
 Teachers should ask students to identify dramatic techniques in live dramatizations. 
 More practice is needed with regard to the Part (c) of drama questions, which tend to 
target the language and application of drama. 
 Teachers should use technology (such as DVDs) to demonstrate how dramatic techniques 
work. 
 Teachers should prepare worksheets with questions/tasks that focus on dramatic 
techniques. 
Old Story Time 
Question 3 
The thematic concern of this question was family relationships. Part (a) asked for Lois’ role in 
the play; Part (b), a discussion of one instance of conflict involving Lois and Part (c), an 
examination of two ways in which Rhone resolves conflict in the play. Candidates tended to 
discuss the play rather than concentrate on Lois’ role. Inaccuracies such as Lois being male, her 
being confused with the character Miss Aggy (Mama) and misrepresenting other texts were 
noted. Acceptable responses for Part (a) dealt with Lois’ pivotal role as wife, daughter, 
daughter-in-law and professional and the ways in which she is connected to Len, Miss Aggy and 
George. In terms of conflict, as required in Part (b), candidates were expected to choose one 
instance in the play where this was evident. Candidates did better in this part as they were able to 
identify and discuss instances such as when Miss Aggy sees her photograph and the 
consequences; any other physical encounter (as in her mother-in-law’s visits); the blackmailing 
incident with George or even when she accuses Len of being cold and insensitive. 
For Part (c), many candidates described instead of examined the two ways in which the conflict 
was resolved. Some concentrated on one conflict instead of two. Acceptable responses included 
dramatic irony, contrast, symbolism (as in the ending of the play) and the use of Pa Ben as 
character/storyteller in his role as mediator. Others concentrated on the ways in which the 
characters solved their own conflict and not the ways in which the playwright did, which 
essentially evaded the playwright’s craft. 
The mean for this question was 16.78. 
 
10
Question 4 
This question earned the lowest mean for the drama section. Candidates were expected to 
describe one instance when the audience was reminded that the play has its roots in the past (Part 
(a)). Acceptable responses for this aspect included the rural setting for the storytelling; 
references to 60 years ago; the type of housing (wattle and daub); the king’s head on stamps and 
monetary currency. Part (b) asked for a discussion of one way in which flashbacks are used to 
reinforce the idea of past events. Candidates were expected to mention for instance, Lois as the 
bank teller and being blackmailed by her boss George; Len’s humiliation at school at the hands 
of George and his peers. Candidates fared better in Part (c) which asked for a discussion of one 
theme highlighted by the playwright’s treatment of the past. Submissions such as family 
relationships, cultural practice, gender, power relationships, colour and class were acceptable. 
The mean for this question was 15.67. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The two named poems for this question were “Dulce et Decorum Est” and “This is the Dark 
Time, My Love”. Part (a) required candidates to describe the suffering presented in each poem. 
They were better able to describe the suffering in “Dulce et Decorum Est”, perhaps because of its 
overtly physical nature. Candidates did not always capture the emotional/mental suffering in the 
latter poem. For Part (b), candidates correctly identified and named the device used to portray the 
suffering but many could not sustain the discussion (that is, keeping it to the theme of human 
suffering). Part (c), which asked candidates to use the title of each poem to discuss the poem they 
found more effective in portraying human suffering, posed some challenges as well. Although 
this part of the question allowed for personal choice and discretion, candidates were expected to 
apply the content and craft to their personal responses. 
The mean for this question was 13.39. 
Question 6 
This question required candidates to identify two poems by name, which focus on relationships. 
Although some candidates did not use poems in this cycle and others used inappropriate texts (as 
in non-poetry), many selected appropriate poems for this question. However, details to support 
the theme of relationships were not always sustained, for example, in “Orchids”. A popular and 
well-handled poem was “God’s Grandeur” which portrays mankind’s relationship with the 
environment. A few lesser known poems were not handled confidently, for example, “South”, 
11
“Theme for English B” and “West Indies, USA”. Part (a) asked candidates to describe the 
relationship. Part (b) asked for a discussion of devices used to explore the relationship in each 
poem. The tendency was to explain and not analyse. Further, in some instances, only one device 
was identified. If this is to be acceptable, the candidates must show its effectiveness (textually) in 
both poems. In order to gain full marks, candidates must correctly identify each device, show 
how it is used to portray the relationship and make a statement of comparison between the two 
poems. 
For Part (c), candidates were asked to discuss the relationship they found more appealing. Many 
did not refer to the other poem or suggest how they came to prefer the poem being discussed. 
Those who handled this section well concentrated on relationships involving man/nature; 
teacher/student; parent/child. For this section, application and poem selection posed challenges. 
Discussions were unbalanced because candidates did not always know both poems well enough 
for the application needed. 
Prose Fiction 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The questions set on the two novels (Questions 7–10) are 
Type A questions. The questions set on the short story consist of Type B questions. Candidates 
were required to answer one question from this section. 
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
This was not a popular choice among candidates. Responses were sparse and superficial. There 
were instances of inaccuracies and personal invention. Very few candidates were sufficiently 
aware of the text and its nuances. For Part (a), candidates were asked to discuss the relationship 
between these characters — Longman and Marlene’s mother and the Lady with no name and 
Marlene’s father. For Part (b), candidates were required to explain what limits the narrator from 
telling the whole story of these relationships. For Part (c), candidates were asked to show how 
the way the story is told contributes to the fascination. The relationships involving Marlene’s 
parents are clouded with uncertainties and candidates for Part (a) were expected to describe what 
appeared to be unusual about these relationships, for instance, Marlene’s observation that when 
the traveller (Longman) stopped or stayed, her mother was exceptionally joyful and would break 
out into singing; the incident of Marlene seeing her father giving fish to the no name lady and his 
stern warning for her not to mention it and the ways in which she became suspicious and 
speculative. 
12
Acceptable responses to Part (b) included, the fact that the narrator’s mother outlines what 
issues belong to the world of adults and that of children; the role of village gossip, superstition 
and rumour; and generally, the limitations of a child narrator, using the first person point of 
view. 
Implicit in this part of the question is the writer’s technique. A few candidates hinted at but did 
not discuss with conviction the elements of Part (c), which really should concentrate on how the 
story is told. Acceptable responses to this part of the question included: using Marlene as the 
child narrator (in a sense, the eyes of a child); the loyal, trusting daughter speculating on the 
marital relationships of her parents; the ways in which the blanks are filled; the interaction of 
the adult or outside perspective on the issues and the role of irony and intrigue. 
The mean for this question was 10.54. 
Question 8 
This was an open-ended question in which candidates were to discuss the two ways of viewing 
the text — as a cohesive whole or as a collection of separate short stories. Acceptable responses 
for the whole text view would entail the fact that Marlene is the single narrator throughout; the 
setting is typically the same rural village; Marlene’s family members appear in the stories and 
that the symbols, and images of the river, silence and colours are seen in the text. For the view of 
the short story, the idea that the stories are self-sustaining; the themes changing; the main 
characters can ‘stand alone’; separate chapter titles and the varying perspectives (from the 
communal to the intensely personal) are all points that may be used. 
The mean for this question was 7.92, the lowest for this paper. 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
This question focused on the roles played by the minor characters Primus and Buntin. Part (a) 
asked for a description of an incident in which either Primus or Buntin plays a meaningful role; 
Part (b) asked candidates to comment on this character’s role in the novel and Part (c), for a 
discussion of the male villagers as a group in the novel. Although it appeared that the word 
meaningful posed a challenge, generally, Primus was the more popular choice for Part (a). Many 
cited the Bolo/Primus standoff and the few who chose Buntin, mentioned his shop being the 
meeting place for the community. Those who chose Buntin often did not recognize that for Part 
(b), he was also part of the awakening of the consciousness of the community and black people 
generally. Although candidates mentioned the activities at his shop, they did not take the 
13
discussion much further. For Part (c), candidates tended to describe what the men did but did not 
so much see how they functioned as a group in terms of their being protectors, guardians of the 
traditions (for example, stick fighting), restorers of order and providers. 
The mean for this question was 19.69. 
Question 10 
This open-ended question asked candidates to look at both sides of Bolo. It was the preferred 
choice although some candidates resorted to storytelling or discussed only one side of Bolo. 
Superior candidates showed both sides of the argument — Bolo the warrior and community￾builder and Bolo the ‘bad john’ who degenerates when the community lacked the courage to 
support his values. 
The mean for this question was 15.97. 
Short Stories 
A World of Prose 
Question 11 
“Berry” and “The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream” were used to discuss the issue of injustice. Part 
(a) asked for an outline of each story; Part (b), a description of the injustice in each story and Part 
(c), a discussion of the narrator the candidate thinks contributes more to his/her understanding of 
injustice. Candidates knew the stories and managed Part (a) quite well. The issue of injustice 
resonated with them and they had strong views about racism, parent/child relationships and 
matters of infidelity. These enabled them to form their own views. What a few lacked for Part (c) 
was showing how their own experiences are shaped by the characters’ experience of injustice. 
Additionally, some candidates did not mention the impact of writer’s craft, as in the omniscient 
narrator’s perspective as a means of getting into the hearts and minds of the characters. 
The mean for this question was 22.41, the highest overall. 
Question 12 
Candidates were asked to refer to two stories studied from their prescribed text and, for Part (a), 
to describe a memorable event or incident in the stories; for Part (b), to comment on one 
character’s reaction to the events or incidents in the stories and for Part ( c), to show how the 
writer keeps the reader interested in the stories. Common choices were “Emma”, “Blackout”, 
14
“Shabine” and “The Boy Who Loved Ice Cream”. Part (b) proved to be the most challenging as 
candidates tended to narrate before getting to the essential material required for the response. 
Some candidates recognized writer’s craft that was necessary to do justice to Part (c) and 
mentioned the child narrator and the use of flashback. 
The mean for this question was 16.71. 
Recommendations 
 Candidates need to be conscious of the demands of the comparative essay, as in Paper 02, 
Questions 5 and 6 (Poetry) and Questions 11–12 (Prose Fiction, Short Stories). 
 A genre-specific approach is suggested so that candidates can better appreciate the 
discrete nature of the genres and not use them inappropriately in their responses. 
 Teachers must continue to teach drama from a technical perspective and not as prose. The 
teaching and reinforcing of dramatic techniques must remain important. 
 Modelling responses and more sustained practice are needed for students to sharpen their 
essay-writing skills. Modelling is essential. Attention must be paid to all parts of the 
question. 
 The use of technology is suggested to enhance and reinforce learning and appreciation of 
texts, for example, websites to enrich the learning experience. 
 Special attention should be paid to the section of the questions addressing the devices and 
effectiveness as candidates continue to underperform in this area. 
Candidates are reminded that January 2015 will be the end of this cycle and hence this cycle of 
texts. A new cycle of texts will be used for June 2015. 
For the Prose section in Paper 02, the only comparative questions are those set on the Short 
Stories (Questions 11 and 12). All other prose questions are on single texts. Candidates need to 
select the appropriate texts from the revised syllabus in order to be adequately prepared for the 
examinations. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L 
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION 
MAY/JUNE 2014 
ENGLISH B 
GENERAL PROFICIENCY EXAMINATION 
Copyright© 2014 Caribbean Examinations Council 
St Michael, Barbados 
All rights reserved. 
-2- 
GENERAL COMMENTS 
The Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate (CSEC) Examination in English B consists of two 
components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 consists of three compulsory questions, one on each mode 
of writing — Drama, Poetry and Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form 
the basis for candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of sub-parts that require candidates 
to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for each question, for a total 
of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination. 
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which correspond to 
the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer one question from each 
section. 
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. Two 
questions are set on each drama text. 
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to engage in 
comparative analysis of aspects of two poems. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are 
specified in the syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified in the 
question. However, for the other, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate poems from those which 
they have studied on the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A questions and the 
two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story section is similar to the poetry 
section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be used and the other requires candidates to choose 
the appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per cent to the 
examination. 
DETAILED COMMENTS 
Paper 01 – Short Answer 
Paper 01 assesses the following skills: 
i) Comprehension 
ii) Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a given effect) 
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following: 
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for example, 
imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain how effectively these 
elements function in the passage 
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props 
 Awareness of the relationship between action and motive 
 Awareness of the interaction among characters 
-3- 
The table below shows mean scores as a percentage of the maximum score for Paper 01 for the period 2012–
2014: 
Mean Scores by Profile: Paper 01, 2012–2014 
(Expressed as Percentage of Profile Maximum Score) 
Paper 01 2012 2013 2014
DRAMA 53.64 52.45 56.08
POETRY 46.76 53.82 48.82
PROSE 48.06 50.51 48.43
Candidates’ performance declined in Poetry and Prose. 
Question 1: Drama 
Eighty-six (0.43%) of the 20,104 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
Part (a) asked candidates to refer to lines 1–4 of the dramatic extract and state what they learnt about Tyrone 
and Mary. Acceptable responses included, Mary and Tyrone are playful/affectionate; Tyrone flatters Mary or
Mary falls for the flattery which seems to transform her. Candidates did well on this question. 
Candidates were asked to state Tyrone’s intention at the beginning of the extract (lines 1–6) for Part (b). 
Acceptable responses included, Tyrone’s intention is to cheer her up or Tyrone’s intention is to distract her 
from what seems to be bothering her. Apart from a few candidates who used similar responses for Parts (a) and 
(b), candidates responded fairly well on this question. 
Part (c) asked candidates what was suggested by Mary’s exclamation, “Right in front of Jamie!” Acceptable 
responses included any of the following: 
 It suggests that she is embarrassed by the affection shown to her in the presence of her son 
 It suggest that they are not normally this affectionate in front of their son; Mary is a coy woman 
 Mary is a shy woman who does not like displays of conjugal affection in front of others 
 Mary is very straight-laced about matters of (sexual) love. 
Most candidates, were able to earn at least some of the 3 marks allocated to this question. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to justify whether Mary was really “fishing for compliments” as in 
lines 8–9. One mark was awarded for the position taken and two marks, for the justification. The flexibility 
of the reader-response element allowed candidates to score in this part as they were allowed to agree or disagree. 
Examples of acceptable responses were as follows: No, Mary is not fishing for compliments. She appears to be 
a senior person and really may have trouble with her eyes; or yes, she is fishing for compliments as she can 
always depend on her husband and son to make her feel better (and stop her from worrying about Edmund). 
Candidates experienced difficulty with Part (e), which asked them to comment on the use of any one of the 
stage directions in presenting Mary’s state of mind from lines 29–42. Most were able to identify and explain 
the stage directions; however, many did not comment on the playwright’s use of the stage directions to 
present Mary’s state of mind. Some candidates also had difficulty with identifying both aspects of Mary’s 
state of mind. Many focused on the fact that she was worried/concerned, and did not recognize that there 
were changes in her state of mind. Acceptable responses captured the following: 
-4- 
The playwright effectively uses the stage directions to establish that Mary seems to be quite agitated or 
distracted. He does this by using the stage directions to show the sudden changes in her mood or mood 
swings (“She laughs…she changes to a brisk business air” and “she sighs with humorous 
exaggeration…she goes to the parlour, then turns, her face worried again”). It seems as though she tries 
to shake off what is disturbing her but it very quickly seems to overcome her. The stage directions show 
the contrasting actions which are an indication of her state of mind. 
For Part (f), candidates were asked to explain the effect that Edmund has on the performance on stage. 
Many candidates did not earn the full four marks on this part and gave superficial responses such as, 
“Edmund adds suspense to the audience.” Acceptable responses should include some of these ideas: 
 
Edmund is not on stage. Yet, all the actions and even emotions displayed on stage are centred on him. 
Mary seems to be distracted and worried because of his illness. Her inconsistent actions seem to be 
because of his illness. Her husband’s actions toward his wife are also directed by Edmund or his illness. 
She seems to have become a “ghost of the dead” and his actions on stage are geared towards bringing 
her back to her former self by helping her not to focus on Edmund’s condition. This is evident in his
exclamation. “You’re a fine lunkhead! Haven’t you any sense? The one thing to avoid is saying anything 
that would get her more upset over Edmund”.
For Part (g), candidates were asked to show how Jamie’s comment, “you can see she’s deliberately fooling 
herself with all that summer cold talk” might affect the audience. This was not handled well. Acceptable 
responses included: 
Jamie’s comment at the end of the extract answers many of the questions that the audience has had about 
the action on stage. The reason for Mary’s state of mind is confirmed. Her husband’s actions are also 
explained. The audience will therefore understand that his actions are quite justified given the situation 
where it seems that Edmund could die. The audience may also feel a great deal of compassion for Mary 
as well as for Tyrone as his wife’s physical appearance, health, and state of mind seem to have 
deteriorated and he seems to be unable to help her, though he tries. 
The mean for this question was 10.81 out of 20. This was the highest mean achieved for the three genres 
tested. 
Question 2 
Thirty-two (0.16 %) of the 20,102 candidates who attempted this question scored full marks. 
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying where (on a train) and when (at night) the event is 
taking place. The second portion of Part (a) asked candidates to say in what way the speaker was different 
from those around him. Candidates had no difficulty in stating that the speaker was alert/awake while the 
others were sleeping. 
Part (b) required candidates to state the impressions created by the used of, “My muscles moved with steel” 
(line 14) and “We thunder through ravines” (line 18). The use of the word “impressions” seemed to have 
caused some amount of difficulty for candidates. Some candidates took a literal interpretation of the first 
quotation. An acceptable response for the first quotation was acknowledgement of the merger of the living 
with the non-living and/or the suggestion of power created. The latter also emphasized the power of the train, 
its speed and especially the loud sound it makes as it rushes through the valley. 
Part (c) required candidates to explain how the poet used contrast in lines 4–5 to hold the reader’s attention. 
Many candidates identified and explained the contrast, but some did not go on to fully explain how this 
contrast served to hold the reader’s attention. Acceptable responses should contain some of the following 
ideas: 
-5- 
The poet contrasts the train/nature; light (from the train)/darkness (of the night); being awake/asleep. 
The speaker shows us the trees, the mountains, the lake, mist and rain as he lies awake while everyone 
around him is asleep. Why is he awake? Why the details of nature? The poet creates these and other 
questions in our minds through the contrasts presented. These questions are only answered at the end of 
the poem, “I stay up half the night/To see the land I love”.
Part (d) required candidates to identify the literary device used in one of the following (1 mark) and 
comment on its effectiveness (2 marks): “Bridges of iron lace” (line 6) or “gullies washed with light” 
(line19). Acceptable responses for the former included a discussion which captured the following: 
Through visual imagery, this metaphor compares the design of the metallic structure to beautiful, 
delicate and patterned needlecraft–that of lace. This comparison extends the contrast between the sound 
of the train as it thunders in the night and the beauty and quiet of the trees, nature the land that he loves. 
For the latter, this metaphor/personification portrayed how the light of the train shines in the darkness, covering 
the gullies with its radiance.
For Part (e), candidates were asked to show how the poet captured the movement in this journey. 
Many candidates focused on movement as the train progressed so they gave information on the various 
sights that the persona experienced as the train moved along. Only a few commented on aspects of the poem 
which suggested movement, for example, diction, devices and rhythm. In other words, candidates seemed to 
relate more to content than to structure. Candidates were expected to mention for instance, the short lines, 
the rhyme scheme and strong stress, weak stress pattern which create a rhythm (beat) that suggests constant 
movement. In addition, candidates were expected to indicate that phrases and words such as “rhythm 
rocks”, “straining”, “thunder”, “rush”, “rattles”, “shake”, “jerk”, “shove”, produce alliterative and 
other sound effects that suggest the powerful engine heading to its destination. 
Part (f) asked candidates to describe the speaker’s attitude in the last two lines of the poem. 
Acceptable responses included: 
the attitude is one of patriotism/nationalism; the love for country is such that the speaker is willing 
to remain awake half the night, just to see his beloved country. Not even the lulling/rocking 
movement of the train could get him to sleep. 
Part (g) asked candidates to suggest another title for the poem (1 mark) and justify this with evidence from 
the poem (2 marks). This question was well done. Candidates used their creativity to find text-based 
suggestions for their titles. 
The mean for this question was 10.41 out of 20. 
Question 3 
Twenty-seven (0.13%) candidates of the 20 043 who attempted the question earned the full marks. The 
mean score (9.99) on Prose Fiction was the lowest of the three genres. 
For Part (a), most candidates had a fair sense of where the event was taking place, and were able to provide 
supporting evidence. Acceptable answers included, near Castle Rock or in a forested area or in the fringes. 
Part (b) (i), required candidates to state why Ralph was hiding, and (ii), asked for a description of his state of 
mind. Acceptable responses included, that he was hiding because he was in danger or he was being hunted by 
the others (“the hunters”). Acceptable responses for the second part of this question included that, Ralph was 
scared. He thought the hunters were pursuing him. He only felt safe when he realized that there was a feast and 
the hunters would be occupied with that. But this feeling of being safe was temporary as he realized that 
tomorrow would bring new dangers. 
-6- 
Many candidates seemed to have some difficulty responding to Part (c), which asked for an explanation of 
the writer’s use of contrast in the first paragraph. Some were not able to identify the contrast. Also, most of 
those who were able to identify the contrast could neither adequately explain it nor comment on how it was 
used by the writer. Many candidates omitted this question. Acceptable responses included: 
The writer contrasts the image of the hunters whom Ralph sees at present with the image of them as 
he had known them; the description of Bill, for instance, as a savage “striped brown, black, and 
red” does not fit the picture or image of Bill in shorts and shirts. Additionally, hunters are supposed 
to be strong and brave, and while the image of the hunters is terrifying in that it generates fear in 
Ralph, these hunters ironically, like Ralph, appear to be quite terrified (“and then had rushed back 
to the sunny rock as if terrified of the darkness under the trees”).
For Part (d), candidates were asked to identify the literary device used in, “The afternoon died away” (line 7) 
or “Ralph wormed out of the ferns” (line 8) and comment on its effectiveness. Acceptable responses 
included the following ideas: 
The former is personification/metaphor. The writer compares the passage of time from afternoon to 
night with death. This emphasizes the fear of the unknown and of danger that Ralph is perhaps 
associating with the night. It also suggests the slow passing of time for Ralph which he has to 
endure. The latter, is metaphor. It creates an image of Ralph’s crawling movement on the ground to 
avoid detection. The image of him moving as a worm (hinting perhaps at his vulnerability) also 
helps the reader to understand the possible danger that he may face. 
For Part (e), two marks were awarded for candidates’ giving the impressions created by “impenetrable 
thicket” (line 9) or, “He peered with elaborate caution” (lines 9-10). Again, the word “impressions” seemed 
to have been a challenge for candidates and many merely paraphrased or explained the selected phrase. 
Acceptable responses should note that 
“impenetrable thicket”— conveys the idea that Ralph is hemmed in by the thick vegetation that he 
cannot get through. This can only symbolize his feeling of being trapped by his hunters or his sense 
of being surrounded by ‘savages’ or the intensity of terror that he cannot think through or the great 
psychological distance between Ralph and his pursuers. The latter (“He peered with elaborate 
caution”) suggests that this expression also emphasizes the danger that Ralph faces. He has been 
hiding and is going to great lengths to protect himself. 
Part (f) asked candidates to explain how the writer maintained suspense in the passage. Some candidates 
seemed to have difficulty identifying suspense, while others mentioned one incident that caused suspense 
but failed to describe how suspense was maintained. Acceptable responses should mention that the writer 
suggests that the hunters are new to this role and seem to be as afraid as the hunted (“terrified of the 
darkness”). Suspense is also maintained because though Ralph is safe because of the feast he is aware that 
tomorrow could present a different situation. It is this sense of uncertainty which heightens the tension and 
keeps the reader in suspense. 
Finally, in Part (g), candidates were asked to identify the overall mood of the passage and to provide 
evidential support for their answer. In some instances, although they identified the correct mood (fear/
anxiety), candidates did not provide textual support. Acceptable responses should include words used such 
as “panic”, “terrified”, “savage” to create the mood; the idea of the hunt is established in the first 
paragraph; the setting (forest, night/darkness) enforces the mood. 
-7- 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 01 
Teachers are encouraged to continue working with students to hone their skills in appreciating and 
responding to literature. In the examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a careful 
reading of the evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that will 
assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are encouraged to 
offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some students use in their responses 
to the questions. Moreover, students need to be familiar with appropriate literary language and use it in their 
writing and should understand genre-specific words, terms and concepts such as mood and suspense. 
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously successful 
attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their varied interpretations and 
emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by 
their obligation to produce the textual evidence for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative 
thinking that the study of literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions 
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 22 of the syllabus): 
i) The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short stories, poems 
and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, states of consciousness and 
other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these to everyday living 
ii) Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and synthesis (the 
ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn from various sections of a 
text for the purpose of answering a particular question) 
iii) The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, analytical 
responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism 
iv) The ability to produce balanced critical analyses 
v) The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various techniques in the 
shaping of language and the presentation of character and behaviour). This skill is tested 
throughout the examination and most particularly in Paper 02 
vi) The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a particular text 
vii) A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in literature. 
Drama 
Shakespeare: — A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1 
Of the pair of questions on this text, the second was more popular than the first, Question 1 sought to elicit a 
discussion on the pairs of rulers, Oberon and Titania and Theseus and Hippolyta. Part (a) asked for a 
description of the circumstances of Oberon’s meeting with Titania in the magic wood. Part (b) required a 
discussion of what resulted from this meeting and Part (c), a comparison of Shakespeare’s presentation of 
Oberon and Titania with that of Theseus and Hippolyta. 
-8- 
Generally, candidates performed satisfactorily, especially in Parts (a) and (b). Part (c), however, posed a 
challenge in that candidates failed to compare Shakespeare’s presentation of one couple with his 
presentation of the other. Candidates fell short in discussing the playwright’s craft. They did not provide an 
adequate comparison of the two couples. For instance, Theseus and Hippolyta personify sobriety and mature
wisdom; they represent stability and a unique union of love and reason, unlike Oberon and Titania, whose 
marital discord upsets the balance in nature and affects the human kingdom. 
The better prepared candidates produced well-developed essays. The mean for this question was 17.41. 
Question 2 
Part (a) of Question 2 asked the candidates to describe the nature of the complaint in Act 1 Scene 1, when 
Egeus approached the court of Theseus regarding Hermia; Part (b) asked for a discussion of the effect of this 
incident on the course of events and Part (c), a discussion of Shakespeare’s presentation of male dominance 
of women in the play. 
This was the most popular of the four drama questions. Candidates demonstrated superior knowledge of the 
text, especially in Parts (a) and (b). However, many candidates resorted to storytelling of the incidents 
identified as examples of male dominance in Part (c). It appears that candidates were not effectively 
prepared to answer questions dealing with dramatic presentations/dramatic techniques. 
The mean for the question was 21.74. 
Modern Drama: Old Story Time 
Question 3 
Question 3 was the second most popular question in the drama section. Part (a) asked for a description of a 
situation in which one character was portrayed as mostly good and one that was mostly evil; Part (b), a 
discussion of the character who made the drama more exciting as a result of this portrayal and finally, Part 
(c), a discussion of how the playwright used the final scene to reinforce the idea that good triumphs over 
evil. 
Generally, candidates were quite knowledgeable of the text although for Part (a) some selected scenes 
instead of ‘a situation’. Candidates referred to characters such as George, Len, Miss Aggy, Pa Ben and Lois. 
Part (b) was the most challenging as candidates generalized and related incidents from the play without 
elaborating. Also, opinions, when given did not have supporting details. Some candidates deviated from the 
characters discussed in Part (a) and so lost marks. For Part (c), some candidates did not focus enough or at 
all on the final scene, though they used aspects from other parts of the play. A few gave their personal 
religious views on this final scene, without the requisite textual reference. Those candidates who gave 
effective responses noted the ways in which this final scene brings together the major characters; the 
effectiveness of the flashback to answer pertinent questions, especially for Miss Aggy’s benefit; the 
symbolism of the circle and the confessions and reaffirmation of love and loyalty. 
The mean for this question was 19.65. 
Question 4 
This was the least popular question on this paper, as only 1 227 candidates attempted it. 
For Part (a) of the question, candidates were asked to describe one instance when the educational appeal of 
storytelling was highlighted. Some candidates found the concept of “educational appeal” problematic as they 
were unable to identify the ‘teachable’ moments in the play. Educational appeal was taken to mean
‘education’, as in Len’s academic achievements. Part (b) asked for a description of one instance when 
humour was used to entertain the audience. Candidates did well in this part as there was no shortage of 
examples of, for instance, Pa Ben’s witty interaction with his ‘on-stage’ audience; the biting exchange 
-9- 
between Lois and Miss Aggy, among others. Part (c) asked candidates to show how Rhone used the art of 
storytelling to appeal to his audience. Acceptable responses included, (but were not limited to) song and 
dance; proverbs and sayings; suspense; preparing for the storytelling event. 
The mean for this question was 16.14. 
Poetry 
Question 5 
The named poems in Question 5 were, “Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge” and “South”. 
Approximately 25 per cent of the candidates attempted this question. Part (a) required candidates to describe 
the places being described in the poems; Part (b) asked for a comparison of the speakers’ attitudes to the 
places portrayed and for Part (c), the task was to discuss one device from each poem which was used to 
create an effective portrayal of the places. 
Some candidates confused “South” with “A Contemplation Upon Flowers” and “God’s Grandeur”. 
Part (a) assessed candidates’ knowledge of the poems by asking them to recall and summarize the 
information. Candidates were more knowledgeable about “Sonnet Composed Upon Westminster Bridge,”
and most responded well to this part of the question. Candidates found Part (b) challenging and many 
struggled with the vocabulary to capture, describe or define “speakers attitudes” (such as reflective, 
nostalgic, and appreciative). Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft), posed its usual 
challenges. In many instances, devices were mentioned but the discussion was vague and lacked textual 
support. There was some confusion regarding the simile (which many candidates continue to misspell) and 
metaphor. Many did not link the devices with the effective portrayal of the places being discussed. 
The mean for this question was 16.78. 
Question 6 
This was the general question and candidates were required to choose from the prescribed list two poems 
that focused on the theme of a memorable event or experience to answer the question set. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the event or experience in each poem; Part (b) asked candidates to compare the 
speakers’ attitudes to the event or experience and finally, Part (c) to discuss one device from each poem 
which is used to present this event or experience. 
Part (a) was handled well for the most part. Popular poem choices were, “Dulce Et Decorum Est”, “Forgive 
My Guilt” and “Dreaming Black Boy.” In this part of the question, candidates were expected to name the 
poems selected but sometimes they did not quote titles correctly. Candidates demonstrated limited 
knowledge about the following poems: “Orchids”, “A Stone’s Throw”, “Theme for English B” and “It is the 
Constant Image of Your Face.” For Part (b), some candidates had difficulty in determining the speaker(s), 
therefore, they were in many instances, unable to address attitude. 
Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of the memorable event and 
experience. Some candidates mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not 
identify the devices. 
The mean for this question was 16.83. 
-10- 
Prose Fiction 
Songs of Silence 
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are Type A questions. 
These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the comparative treatment of two 
novels. 
Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular. However, some of the candidates who attempted questions on 
this text demonstrated interesting insights. Part (a) of Question 7 asked for a description of two occasions in 
which readers get a rich picture of rural life. Appropriate responses could include Effita’s warnings of death; 
the No-name Lady’s habits; school activities; children’s games; church services and village gossip. Part (b) 
asked for one technique used by Forbes to create this effect. Candidates were expected to make references 
to, for instance, the use of the child’s voice or perspective; re-creation of diction and register of characters; 
recounting colourful conversations; symbols, metaphors, humour and proverbs. Part (c), asked for 
candidates to comment on the lessons that readers might glean from these presentations. Some candidates 
had challenges with the word glean. 
The mean for the question was 18.11. 
Question 8 
Question 8 asked for a discussion of the statement, “The narrator’s references to school life allow us to 
understand the complex social influences and the varying outcomes of schooling in rural Jamaica.” 
The term “complex social influences” seemed to have interfered with candidates’ understanding of the 
question. Candidates did not treat this as an argumentative essay in which the onus was on them to provide 
textual evidence to support the position taken. Strong textual evidence could have been taken from chapters 
such as “The Idiot”, “Miss Minnie” and “Little Fool Fool, Fathers and Travelers.”
Two candidates scored full marks. The mean for this question was 15.00. 
The Wine of Astonishment 
Question 9 
Part (a) asked candidates to describe one incident in which Eva played a major part as Bee’s wife; Part (b), a 
discussion of her role as character in the novel as a whole and Part (c) required candidates to say how she 
differed from the other women in the novel. Generally, candidates did well but found Part (c) challenging as 
they merely narrated Eva’s qualities, with little emphasis on the actual difference between Eva and the other 
women and providing textual reference to support the points made. Acceptable responses for this part of the 
question should focus on the fact that Eva is the most developed of the female characters; she may be
compared with other women such as Eulalie, Ivan Morton’s wife, the other women who are portrayed as 
victims and objects. 
The mean for this question was 16.63. 
Question 10 
Candidates were asked to discuss the following statement: “The major conflict in The Wine of Astonishment
is between tradition and change.” Responses to this question ranged from poor to superior. Mediocre 
responses confined themselves to narration of the plot without analysis of the text, with little knowledge of 
background to the context. There was the tendency to focus mainly on Ivan or Bolo. Superior candidates 
were able to successfully analyse the events as told by Eva and demonstrate the link between conflict, 
tradition and change as well as provide evidence to support their responses. While most candidates 
-11- 
understood the nature of both tradition and conflict there were those who concentrated heavily on either 
tradition or conflict. 
The mean for this question was 16.56. 
Short Story 
Question 11 
This section is similar to the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. Additionally, the short stories 
to be used are specified in one question, while for the other question candidates choose two appropriate short 
stories from the prescribed list to answer the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were, “Septimus” and “The Man of the House.” Part (a) asked 
candidates to describe how the mother of each boy demonstrated her special care for him. Part (b) asked for 
an explanation of the ways in which each boy went astray and Part (c) asked candidates to comment on the 
message each story conveyed about the boys. 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward. For Part (b), acceptable responses included the 
principle of sharing that Septimus’ mother tried to instill in him and for the latter story, how the boy failed 
to live up to his responsibilities. In Part (c), candidates experienced some difficulty in comprehending the 
word “conveys”. The message in the first story is the power of strong family values in changing and 
sustaining one’s character. For the latter, the message is that it takes more than goodwill to assume the 
responsibilities of manhood. 
The mean for this question was 16.11. 
Question 12 
In this question, candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list that shared the same 
theme and in Part (a), to describe what happened in each story; Part (b) asked for an explanation of how each 
story illustrated the theme. Some candidates failed to precisely define/describe the theme and consequently, 
many contrived their own (such as in “black’ and “food”). Part (c), asked for a comparison of the authors’ 
treatment of the theme in the two stories. Candidates knew the stories selected, for the most part. However, 
some candidates lost marks because they included inappropriate texts (such as poems, drama texts 
and novels). Apart from naming and discussing devices, candidates generally demonstrated a degree of 
weakness in writing the comparative essay. 
The mean for this question was 18.20. 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PAPER 02 
On the whole, many essays were well structured, coherent and cohesive. Teachers and students should be 
commended for this achievement. However, more attention needs to be given to the acquisition of 
knowledge of literary terms and dramatic techniques, the ability to discuss their use by the playwright and to 
comment on their effectiveness. We urge teachers to continue to emphasize and recognize genre-specific 
terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness. 
Teachers and students should note that the January 2015 sitting will be the last of this current cycle of 
texts. 
-12- 
The new cycle of the syllabus will begin in June 2015. 
1. Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of preparation for the 
examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short stories) limits the depth of the 
discussion and textual evidence needed for strong arguments. 
2. Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama text to answer 
the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in such instances as this is a 
genre-specific examination. 
3. The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to weaken the 
analytical element in essays. 
4. Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, strengthen 
vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are encouraged to find 
opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which target introductory paragraphs and 
finding textual evidence to develop one point (even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students to 
develop the required skills. 
5. Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as ‘dramatic function’ and ‘writer’s craft’. 
students need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer deliberately selected words or plotted 
events for particular effects. 
6. Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they must be constantly 
reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are being tested (and not the film version, 
for instance). 
7. Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, describe, 
determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by dedicating time to closely 
examining the nature of the response expected by each of these and other key words used in questions. 
8. While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and reading the poems, for instance, teachers 
are encouraged to take them one step further. They should be empowered to master the language to 
describe, explain and analyse with greater clarity those experiences shared and gained through 
listening and speaking. 
9. Teachers must remind students of the potential of Literature. It is not merely a tool or an instrument 
of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can help students to explore, 
question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and attitudes. This dimension, this kind of 
applicability, is what sometimes emerged in superior scripts. 
C A R I B B E A N E X A M I N A T I O N S C O U N C I L
REPORT ON CANDIDATES’ WORK IN THE
CARIBBEAN SECONDARY EDUCATION CERTIFICATE® EXAMINATION
JANUARY 2015
ENGLISH B
GENERAL PROFICIENCY 
Copyright © 2015 Caribbean Examinations Council
St Michael, Barbados
All rights reserved.
2
GENERAL COMMENTS
The English B examination consists of two components — Paper 01 and Paper 02. Paper 01 
consists of three compulsory questions, one on each mode of writing — Drama, Poetry and 
Prose Fiction. These modes of writing are the content profiles which form the basis for 
candidates’ assessment. Each question consists of a number of subparts that require 
candidates to give approximately five to seven short answers. Twenty marks are allocated for
each question, for a total of 60 marks. Paper 01 contributes 36 per cent to the examination.
Paper 02 consists of 12 optional extended essay questions, arranged in three sections, which 
correspond to the modes of writing and profiles assessed. Candidates are required to answer 
one question from each section.
Drama consists of four Type A questions. These are questions which are set on specific texts. 
Two questions are set on each drama text. Candidates are required to answer one question 
from this section.
Poetry consists of two Type B questions. These are questions that require candidates to 
engage in comparisons. Candidates are required to study 20 poems which are specified in the 
syllabus. For one of the questions, Question 5, the poems to be used are specified by the 
examiner. However, for the second question, Question 6, candidates choose two appropriate 
poems from those which they have studied from the prescribed list to answer the question. 
Candidates are required to answer one question from this section. 
Prose Fiction consists of six questions. The four questions set on the novels are Type A 
questions and the two questions set on the short stories are Type B questions. The short story 
section is similar to the poetry section, in that one question specifies the short stories to be 
used and the other requires candidates to choose the appropriate short stories from the 
prescribed list to answer the question. Candidates are required to answer one question from 
this section. 
Each question in Paper 02 is worth 35 marks for a total of 105. Paper 02 contributes 64 per 
cent to the examination.
DETAILED COMMENTS
Paper 01 – Short Answer
Paper 01 assesses the following skills:
 Comprehension
 Awareness of the writer’s craft (that is, the ability to say how a writer/poet achieves a 
given effect)
Candidates are required to demonstrate the following:
 Analysis, which here takes the form of reducing a passage to its verbal constituents (for 
example, imagery, rhythm, tone or mood, sound of words) and the ability to explain 
how effectively these elements function in the passage.
 Knowledge of dramatic devices such as stage directions and props
3  Awareness of the relationship between action and motive
 Awareness of the interaction among characters
The table below shows mean scores for Paper 01 for 2015: 
Percentages of Mean Scores for 2015
Paper 01 2015 Mean (20)
Drama 10.39
Poetry 9.75
Prose 12.02
Performance on Prose Fiction was the best compared with that of Drama and Poetry. 
Question 1: Drama
Part (a) asked candidates to briefly describe what is happening in the extract. Acceptable 
responses included Harry learns that his mother has been called to the hospital and that his 
father may be discharged. Candidates did fairly well on this question.
For Part (b), candidates were asked to refer to the exchange between Sam and Hally and 
explain the effect created by the use of short sentences in lines 3–16. Acceptable responses 
included the building of tension and speeding up of the action. Responses were somewhat 
vague for this part of the question. 
Part (c) asked candidates to suggest one reason for Hally’s mood change in line 17. 
Acceptable responses included, he realizes that his father may be discharged or his father 
has gotten worse. 
For Part (d), candidates were required to explain the dramatic function of the telephone call 
in line 24. In order to earn full marks, candidates needed to include one of the following: the 
call serves to introduce a point of tension; provide information about Hally’s parents (Hally 
thinking his mother is weak and not strong enough to resist her husband’s demands); provide 
clarification of the message; provide information on Hally (shows that he may be insincere or 
selfish or shows the relationship with his father). Some candidates did not earn full marks 
because the explanation was lacking. 
Part (e) asked candidates to describe the relationship between Sam and Hally and provide 
supporting evidence. Candidates did well on this part of the question. Acceptable responses 
included the idea that although it is an employer/employee relationship, it is a warm and 
caring one. 
For Part (f) (i), candidates were asked to explain the irony in lines 29–32 and Part (f) (ii) 
asked for a revelation of Hally’s character from these lines. Candidates did not perform well 
on this part of the question. Many did not see the irony in the son’s response that the hospital 
was best for his father and interpreted this as genuine concern for his father’s wellbeing and 
not as an indication of his own selfishness. 
4
Candidates were asked to suggest how Hally might react if his father came home and to 
provide justification for this suggestion. Candidates made sensible suggestions ranging from 
the son’s resentfulness, his failing his examinations, or his avoidance of his father since he 
wants to study. This question assessed candidates’ ability to use the context to make 
judgement and draw reasonable conclusions. 
Question 2: Poetry
For Part (a), most candidates were correct in identifying the word (“again”) in stanza 1 that 
showed that the trumpeter had been to that location before. 
Part (b) required candidates to explain two images of the trumpeter that were suggested in 
stanza 1 and to provide the evidence. In some instances, the images were provided without 
the evidence and vice versa. Acceptable responses included: image of a crazy person, with 
the evidence, “no wild paranoid gaze”; a beggar, with evidence, “no palm turned upward”; 
a sad/depressed person, with evidence, “no sad haze…”; and a proud/confident person, with 
evidence, “only a prideful stare”. 
Part (c) required candidates to state three effects of the power of music in stanza 2. Many 
candidates gave literal responses and others simply ‘lifted’ portions of the poem to supply a 
response. Acceptable responses should have contained some of these ideas: kingdoms 
fall/power relationships change; people are liberated; people are empowered; prisoners are 
set free and earthquakes occur. 
Part (d) required candidates to identify the literary device used in one of the following and 
comment on its effectiveness: “cities that crack and crumble” (line 15) or “these piercing 
notes / may be daggers too” (lines 22–23). Acceptable responses for the former included a 
discussion which captures the following: The hard ‘c’ sound contributes to the force and 
impact of the fall. The crack speaks to the initial reaction to the force, whereas the 
crumbling, to the final movement in the process. The implicit comparison of a concrete 
structure being ‘broken’ by trumpet blasts may also allude to the fallen walls of Jericho after 
the collective ‘shout’/musical blast. The device here may be any of the following: 
alliteration, metaphor, onomatopoeia. 
For the latter, any of these devices is appropriate: metaphor/irony/paradox/oxymoron/word 
play. Irony/paradox is seen in that the musician is profoundly changed by the very change in 
his listeners. There is paradox in the fact that music portrays how the beauty of the music 
causes pain. Word play and oxymoron are evident in that “piercing notes” and “daggers”
both suggest wounds. There is a certain amount of incongruity in comparing the musical 
notes (something associated with healing and peace) with daggers (something associated 
with hurt and violence). 
For Part (e), candidates were asked to select an example of either rhyme or repetition and 
comment on its effectiveness. The attempt here was fair in that candidates had a good sense 
of these devices. Their shortcoming was commenting on the effectiveness. Regarding rhyme, 
there are significant sound effects and some amount of half rhyme, as in lines 6 and 7 
(“stare” and “aware” and lines 23 and 25, (“too” and “blue”). These long sounds 
contribute to the mood and enhance the intensity of the trumpet blasts. Regarding repetition, 
the word ‘no’ is repeated three times in stanza 1 and the phrase “down it comes” twice in 
stanza 2. The repeated “no” adds to the militancy of the trumpeter and reinforces the 
absence of what he is usually perceived to be (crazy and destitute). Stanza 2 builds the 
5
momentum as the music gathers a life and strength of its own, tearing down structures with 
its power. 
Candidates were asked to identify in Part (f), three ways in which the final stanza is different 
from the others. This was fairly manageable for the candidates. Acceptable responses 
included any of these three ways: it is shorter; it concentrates on the trumpeter and how he is 
affected by his own music; it shows the trumpeter has his own pain; it is more reflective; the 
more subtle effects of the music are evident. 
Part (g) asked candidates to identify, with supporting evidence, the speaker’s attitude to the 
trumpeter. Although many could not find the appropriate literary language, many conceded, 
rightly, that the attitude is positive. Appropriate responses for the attitude included
admiration, respect and appreciation. Supporting evidence included “man-god”; “he / 
stands, and with trumpet levelled”; “a prideful stare”; “he alone knows”.
Question 3
For Part (a) (i), most candidates were correct in identifying the setting (forest/near a river) 
and were able to say why Will captured the iguana Part (a) (ii), which was to provide food. 
Part (b) required candidates to use supporting evidence and say why the mood in paragraph 1 
is different from that of paragraph 2. Acceptable responses should have captured the contrast, 
such as the mood in paragraph 1 is peaceful, calm, quiet and serene while the mood created 
in paragraph 2 is tense, fearful and threatening. The response must have included the 
appropriate supporting evidence in order to gain full marks.
Many candidates seemed to have a challenge responding to Part (c), which asked for an 
explanation of the effect of each of these images: “giant fig tree with thick, gnarled roots” and 
“water seemed to turn from a dark green to an almost black”. Responses tended to be rather 
literal and descriptive. For the former, acceptable responses should have included the idea of 
the impact of the knotted roots, the strength of nature and an overall frightening/eerie effect. 
For the latter, the many references to water cannot be unnoticed. The progression to the 
darkness of the water engenders fear/threat and suggests an ominous mood. 
For Part (d), candidates were asked to identify one characteristic of Will and provide 
supporting evidence. Acceptable response included: Will is careful/cautious (he takes his time 
to catch the iguana; he moves slowly and quietly); Will is a skilled hunter (he is equipped for 
his job as he has his stick with the loop and the canvas bag to capture and store the iguana); 
Will is attuned to his environment (he is alert to any changes; he notices the changes in the 
water, the noise of the howler monkeys); he admires nature’s beauty (he looks at the sunset, 
he has a deep desire to live close to nature). 
For Part (e), three marks were awarded for candidates’ explanation of how dialogue 
contributes to suspense in the passage. Not many candidates earned full marks. Acceptable 
responses included: it increases the sense of danger (when Sharper tells Will that militia 
scouts are around); it reinforces the mood of fear (the dialogue occurs in whispers); it 
advances the plot (informing the reader that the characters are moving towards the cave and 
that others are there, in hiding). 
Part (f) asked candidates to suggest why Will dreams of building a house by the creek or 
river. Candidates attempted this part reasonably well. Acceptable responses included: Will 
6
likes the beauty of the river (the sunset, the water, the enormous trees); Will enjoys the calm 
and peacefulness of the environment and he enjoys the idea of freedom (going to far 
undiscovered places) that the river symbolizes. 
Finally, in Part (g), candidates were asked to predict, with justification, what would happen 
next in this episode. Candidates, for the most part, gave reasonable submissions such as the 
characters will go to the cave and find the others gone; the militia scouts will track them and 
might kill them; a battle might ensue or they will reach the cave and get a chance to eat the 
iguana. 
Recommendations 
Candidates continue to underperform in parts of the questions which require interpretive, 
analytical and non-literal responses. Therefore, teachers are encouraged to continue working 
with students to hone their skills in appreciating and responding to literature. In the 
examination, candidates are required to base their inferences on a careful reading of the 
evidence in the stimulus material as a whole. Students need to be taught the strategies that 
will assist them in arriving at meaning based on a thoughtful processing of the events 
described. 
While in this paper no marks are specifically awarded for the use of language, teachers are 
encouraged to offer students parallel Standard English constructions to the dialect that some 
students use in their responses to the questions.
Students need to get accustomed to and use in their writing, the appropriate literary language 
and understand genre-specific words, terms and concepts such as mood, effect, suspense and
attitude.
More importantly, however, is the need for teachers to confidently build on their obviously 
successful attempts to have the students offer and defend, with evidence from the text, their 
varied interpretations and emotional responses to the texts they read. This prioritizing of 
students’ autonomous thought, bolstered by their obligation to produce the textual evidence 
for their conclusions is at the heart of the critical and creative thinking that the study of 
literature is meant to engender. 
Paper 02 – Essay Questions
The following are the skills and aptitudes tested in Paper 02 (as outlined on page 22 of the 
syllabus)
 The ability to respond to West Indian and other literatures in English: novels, short 
stories, poems and plays; to make rational and sensitive appraisal of value judgments, 
states of consciousness and other concepts explained in literature, and to relate these 
to everyday living
 Description, analysis (the ability to break down and select relevant details) and 
synthesis (the ability to bring together and condense in a new form information drawn 
from various sections of a text for the purpose of answering a particular question)
 The ability to communicate informed opinions and judgments in well-structured, 
analytical responses in written form using the vocabulary of literary criticism
7  The ability to produce balanced, critical analyses
 The awareness of the writer’s craft (the writer as a person who employs various 
techniques in the shaping of language and the presentation of character and 
behaviour). This skill is tested throughout the examination and most particularly in 
Paper 02
 The ability to recognize and distinguish between moral assumptions contained in a 
particular text
 A grasp of concepts and values and an understanding of how these are manifested in 
literature.
Drama – A Midsummer Night’s Dream
Question 1
For the questions on Shakespeare, the first was more popular. Question 1 sought to elicit 
from candidates, a discussion on the theme of love. Part (a) asked for a description of the love 
relationship of one of the couples. Part (b) required a description of the challenges faced by 
the couple and Part (c), a discussion of one dramatic technique that Shakespeare used to 
portray the theme of love.
Candidates showed a preference for the relationship between Hermia and Lysander. While 
candidates generally gave an average response, some concentrated on retelling the plot 
without focusing on the question. Of the three areas for discussion, Part (c) was not handled 
well. Generally, candidates were unable to identify and discuss the dramatic techniques used 
to portray the theme of love. Acceptable responses for a discussion of dramatic technique 
should have included any one of the following: dramatic irony (as in Puck and the love 
potion); personification of male dominance (as in Shakespeare’s presentation of male 
characters such as Egeus, Theseus and Oberon); use of contrast; the presentation of the 
magic wood as a reflection of the ‘real’ world; humour; Puck (as a character and 
commentary on love); allusion (classical references to Hero and Leander’s tragic love story). 
Question 2
This question pertains to the issue of the powerful and the powerless. Part (a) asked 
candidates to describe one incident in which one character exerts power over another; Part (b) 
asked for a description of how the character responds to the situation and Part (c), a 
discussion of one dramatic technique Shakespeare used to present male dominance of women
in the play. 
The most popular relationship discussed was Egeus and Hermia. A description of the 
victim/powerless would have allowed candidates to gain full marks for Part (b). Based on the 
responses for Part (c), it appears that candidates were not effectively prepared to answer 
questions dealing with dramatic presentations/dramatic techniques. Acceptable responses for 
this part should have included any one of the following: dramatic irony, personification of 
male dominance, use of contrast, comic humour and the character of Puck as a commentary 
on love. 
8
Old Story Time
Question 3
Part (a) asked for a description of one incident in the play in which Pearl is featured and one 
in which Margaret is featured; Part (b) required a discussion of how either Pearl or Margaret 
contributes to the development of the play and finally, Part (c), a discussion of the 
playwright’s presentation of women in the play.
Generally, candidates were quite knowledgeable of the text, although for Part (a) many 
mentioned Miss Aggy’s abuse of Len and not the taunting exchange between Len and Pearl. 
Also, some candidates failed to mention Margaret’s racist tendencies and disparaging 
remarks about Miss Aggy and Len. Part (b) was treated superficially. Pearl’s altered 
appearance to mark the passage of time; Pearl as a foil; Miss Aggy’s ironic adoration of 
Margaret; and Margaret as the symbol of perfection were acceptable responses for Part (b). 
Part (c) required a discussion of any/all of these women — Miss Aggy, Pearl, Lois and 
Margaret. Some candidates did not focus enough or at all on Part (c). Acceptable responses 
included the role of single parents; sex and sexuality; dramatic irony; women as symbols; the 
use of contrast and the exploration of issues such as class, colour and gender. 
Question 4
For Part (a), candidates were asked to discuss why Len wrote the love letter (to Margaret). 
Most candidates handled this part of the question fairly well but some were of the incorrect 
view that Len was genuinely in love with Margaret and not that he was only following his 
mother’s instructions. Part (b) asked for an explanation of the effects this letter had on the 
development of the play. A glaring omission for this part was the significant effect of 
flashbacks. Part (c) asked candidates to discuss how Rhone uses the letter incident to portray 
one important theme in the play. A common theme discussed was racism. However, some 
candidates discussed this theme in very general terms and disregarded the context of the 
drama. 
Poetry
Question 5
The named poems in Question 5 were “Orchids” and “God’s Grandeur”. Part (a) required 
candidates to describe the view of nature presented in each poem; Part (b) asked for the 
comment each poem makes on humanity’s impact on nature and for Part (c), the task was to 
discuss one device from each poem which was used to portray nature.
Generally, “God’s Grandeur” was handled better, although a few candidates confused this 
poem with “A Contemplation Upon Flowers”. 
Part (c), which focused on literary devices (the writer’s craft), posed a challenge for many 
candidates. In many instances, devices were mentioned but the discussion was vague and 
lacked textual support. There was some confusion regarding the simile (which candidates 
continue to misspell) and metaphor. Many did not link the device with the effective portrayal 
of nature. 
9
Question 6
By far the more popular question, this was the general question and candidates were required 
to choose from the prescribed list, two poems that focused on the theme of oppression to 
answer the question set. Part (a) required candidates to describe the nature of the oppression. 
Candidates generally discussed the oppressive situation but did not identify the type of 
oppression (for example, political and social) experienced by the speaker.
Part (b) asked candidates to explain how the oppression affects the speaker and finally, Part 
(c) asked candidates to discuss one device from each poem which is used to present the 
oppression. Part (c) aimed to connect the devices chosen for discussion to the theme of 
oppression. This part of the question continues to pose a challenge to candidates. Some 
candidates mentioned but did not elaborate on the use of the devices. Some did not identify 
the devices.
Prose Fiction
Songs of Silence
Question 7 
The questions on the novels in the revised syllabus on which this examination is based are 
Type A questions. These questions require close individual study of each text rather than the 
comparative treatment of two novels. 
Songs of Silence continues to be unpopular. Question 7 referenced the chapters/stories “Miss 
Minnie” and “Travellers or Fathers, or Little Fool Fool” and Part (a) asked for a description 
of the person who nurtures the child in each chapter/story. Acceptable responses for this part 
included Miss Minnie and Cudjoe Man. Part (b) asked for a discussion of how each child is 
affected by the person described in Part (a). For Part (c), candidates were asked to discuss 
Forbes’ presentation of family in the novel. Responses tended to be vague and very 
superficial. Candidates who attempted this question did not do very well and many scored 
zero.
Question 8 
This question asked for a discussion of the statement, “In Songs of Silence individuals are 
often in conflict with the community to which they belong.” Part (a) asked for a description 
of one of these characters — Mister Papacita, Effita and Cudjoe Man. Part (b) asked for a 
discussion on the ways in which Forbes presents the selected character’s difference and Part 
(c), asked for a discussion of Forbes’ presentation of community in the novel. Candidates 
tended to narrate and describe events in the novel without focusing on the question. In some 
instances, candidates created their own narratives in a bid to augment their responses. 
Therefore, scores achieved were quite low.
10
The Wine of Astonishment
Question 9 
Part (a) asked candidates to describe one incident in which the villagers of Bonasse 
experience betrayal. Acceptable responses included Ivan Morton’s response to his roots and 
values; Corporal Prince’s abusive behavior and Bolo’s ‘turning’ on his own people in 
frustration. Part (b) required a discussion of the impact on the Bonasse community. Part (c)
required candidates to explore how Eva’s voice contributes to a deeper understanding of the 
community’s sense of betrayal. Generally, candidates found Part (c) challenging as they 
merely narrated Eva’s qualities. Acceptable responses for this part of the question should 
have focused on the fact that Eva’s voice is one of an insider and not an outsider. She voices 
the collective consciousness of the Bonasse community; she is able to recall the community’s 
past and traditions and show the changes and even as a ‘sympathetic insider’ Eva shows 
some amount of objectivity by neither judging nor condemning the motives of those who, for 
instance, move away from the church.
 
Question 10 
Candidates were asked to respond to Bee’s report of Ivan’s statement: “We can’t be white but 
we can act white.” Part (a) asked for a description of the situation which prompts this 
statement. Part (b) required a discussion of the effects of this statement on Bee. Candidates 
did not manage this section satisfactorily. Acceptable responses included Bee’s anger, 
disappointment, shame, sadness and other suitable negative emotions, with textual evidence. 
Part (c) asked candidates to show how Lovelace uses the characterization of Ivan Morton to 
explore the theme of whiteness in the novel. Many candidates did not make a strong enough 
connection between the theme of whiteness and characterization. Acceptable responses 
included descriptions of Ivan and his European look (dress, chauffeur-driven); Ivan’s house 
as a symbol (he leaves his father’s house to live in Mr Richardson’s big white house); images 
of white/light (his light-skinned wife being selected over the village (black) beauty, Eulalie). 
Short Story
Question 11
The short story section patterns the poetry section in that Type B questions are asked. 
Additionally, the short stories to be used are specified in one question, while for the other
question; candidates choose two appropriate short stories from the prescribed list to answer 
the question posed. 
The two short stories specified in Question 11 were “Berry” and “Blackout.” This question
asked candidates to describe an incident in which racism occurs. Part (b) asked for a 
discussion of the consequences of this incident and Part (c) asked candidates to discuss how 
the writer uses dialogue or characterization to present the theme of racism. 
Candidates found Part (a) reasonably straightforward and responded well to the instances of 
racism, especially in “Berry”. For Part (b), candidates tended to narrate the stories rather than 
discuss the consequences. Acceptable responses included Berry’s baffled/puzzled reflection; 
his labelling people as “good” or “bad”; the woman in “Blackout” is forced to reflect on her 
sense of superiority; the refusal of victims to be treated as such. 
11
Part (c) appears to have posed a challenge to some candidates as they did not attempt this part 
while others made personal comments on the stories. Acceptable responses included: 
dialogue is used to establish contrast and reflect social/racial differences; it sets the scene for 
racial tensions to emerge; it reinforces the plot and conflict; it reveals characters. In both 
stories, characterization is used to reveal hidden prejudices and racist attitudes; characters’ 
actions are used to reveal racism and the writers use contrasting characters to reveal racism. 
Question 12
In this question, candidates were asked to select any two stories from the prescribed list with 
the same theme, in this instance the theme of relationships. In Part (a), candidates were asked 
to describe the nature of one of the relationships; Part (b) asked for a discussion of how the 
persons involved are affected by the relationship and Part (c), asked candidates to show one 
way in which the writers sustain interest in the portrayal of the relationships. Candidates were 
comfortable in handling Part (a). They were less so for Part (b). Acceptable responses should 
have indicated through the various types of relationships (parent/child; husband/wife; 
grandmother/grandchild; employer/employee) whether the effect is a negative or positive 
one. In answering Part (c), the positive or negative effects on the relationships require 
identification of the technique used by the writers to convey the message. Acceptable 
responses included: narrative perspective; use of symbols; use of dialogue; flashback, 
especially in creating suspense; irony, suspense and satire. 
Observations and Recommendations 
Although we commend teachers for their hard work, we are encouraging them to pay more 
attention to these areas which usually form the Part (c) of the questions: knowledge of literary 
terms and dramatic techniques; the ability to discuss and comment on the effectiveness of 
techniques and devices. We urge teachers/instructors to continue to emphasize and recognize 
genre-specific terms and to engage students in analysing their effectiveness.
 Text selection and text choice ought to be discussed in class as one aspect of 
preparation for the examination. Sometimes textual choice (as in poems and short 
stories) limits the depth of the discussion and textual evidence needed for strong 
arguments.
 Many candidates lost marks because they crossed genres for example, using a Drama 
text to answer the question in the Prose Fiction section. No marks can be awarded in 
such instances as this is a genre-specific examination.
 The tendency to narrate, evident in responses in the Prose Fiction section, continues to
weaken the analytical element in essays.
 Teachers are also encouraged to continue to reinforce and teach essay-writing skills, 
strengthen vocabulary, grammar, paragraphing and sentence construction. They are 
encouraged to find opportunities to give small writing tasks such as exercises which 
target introductory paragraphs and finding textual evidence to develop one point 
(even a paragraph at a time) to assist weaker students to develop the required skills.
 Teachers are encouraged to pay attention to concepts such as dramatic function and 
writer’s craft. Candidates need to demonstrate that they are aware that the writer 
deliberately selected words or plotted events for particular effects.
12
 Even as students are encouraged to see other versions of the texts under study, they 
must be constantly reminded that only the texts, as they appear on the syllabus, are 
being tested (and not the film version, for instance).
 Students should know the skills required when they are asked to define, discuss, trace, 
describe, determine, comment on, or show. Teachers must prepare students by 
dedicating time to closely examining the nature of the response expected by each of 
these and other key words used in questions.  While it was clear that students were exposed to hearing and/or reading the poems, for 
instance, teachers are encouraged to take them one step further; they should be 
empowered to master the language to describe, explain and analyse with greater 
clarity those experiences shared and gained through listening and speaking.
 Teachers must remind students of the potential of literature. It is not merely a tool or 
an instrument of the writers’ style, but is also the ‘lived’ experience. Literature can 
help students to explore, question, form judgments and reinforce certain values and 
attitudes. This dimension, the kind of applicability, is what sometimes emerged in 
superior scripts.
Candidates are reminded that January 2015 will be the end of this cycle and hence this cycle 
of texts. A new cycle of texts will be used from June 2015. 
